2023 32nd IEEE International Conference on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN) | 979-8-3503-3670-2/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/RO-MAN57019.2023.10309527

2023 32nd IEEE International Conference on Robot and
Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN)
August 28-31, 2023. Paradise Hotel, Busan, Korea

Communication as Joint Prediction: A Case Study of Robot-Mediated
Pretend Play with Children at a Kindergarten
Hideki Kozima1
Abstract— Children naturally engage in pretend play with
others in their daily life. The children share each other’s
expectations toward objects and people around them. Such
expectation-sharing can be considered the fundamental process
of social communication, where we exchange beliefs, desires,
and intentions. Firstly, the present paper examines some cases
of such expectation-sharing in pretend play observed in our
longitudinal robot-mediated interaction with 27 preschoolers
(3-to-4-year-olds) at a kindergarten. The robot, which the
researchers in another room remotely controlled, has a simple
appearance and motion to accept various expectations from
the children. The robot functioned as a pivot for the children
to exchange each other’s expectations towards the robot, toys,
and people. The children might bring expectations incongruent
with each other, but such expectations gradually converged
into a consistent one, on which they understood each other’s
verbal and non-verbal actions. Secondly, this paper interprets
and models these cases using the predictive coding theory.
According to the theory, the children project their predictions
onto the shared environment and update the predictions by
minimizing the error against reality. This act of projection,
which was performed as labeling (e.g., a block as a rice ball)
or pretend action (e.g., feeding it to the robot) by the children,
is a form of active inference to modify the environment to
match the prediction. The children exchanged and coordinated
their predictions through visible action collectively accumulated
in the playing environment around the robot. We conclude
that joint prediction is the fundamental process of social
communication, where we coordinate each other’s behavior for
collaboration.

I. INTRODUCTION
We can imagine things that do not exist or have not
happened before our eyes. We can even imagine impossible
events or completely new things. This ability of imagination
and creativity is probably unique to humans, which has given
us the ability to produce stories and tools [1]. Even preschool
children can imagine such nonexistent things and events in
their pretend play in their daily life [2], [3], [4]. For example,
it is natural for children to play house, where each has a
particular role (e.g., mother), and their toys have imaginary
meanings (e.g., a teddy bear for their baby, a block for a
piece of food to feed).
This ability for pretense is not only for creating fantasy but also for communication among children [5], [6].
Children collectively engage in pretend play, where they
refer to and exchange each other’s imagination toward the
visible scene in front of them. Each of the children may
have different imagination at the beginning; however, they
gradually converge into a shared set of expectations on
1 Graduate School of Education, Tohoku University, Kawauchi 27-1,
Aoba, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8576, Japan xkozima@tohoku.ac.jp

979-8-3503-3670-2/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE

which they understand each other’s verbal and non-verbal
actions. This convergence of expectations is the fundamental
process of everyday communication, where we imagine and
exchange each other’s beliefs, desires, and intentions in order
to collaborate on shared goals.
We carried out a longitudinal series of children-robot
interactions at a kindergarten, where we observed such
expectation-sharing in their pretend play involving our robot.
Those children interacted with each other and resonated
their imagination toward the robot. The children shared their
expectations of the robot’s condition (e.g., being sad or sick)
and its role in the play (e.g., a baby or a customer) and
collaboratively developed a storyline. As they collectively
overlap and coordinate their verbal and non-verbal actions
in the shared environment of pretend play, the children’s
internal fantasies converge within a specific range, consistent
with their major predictions and actual experiences. We have
observed a lot of such scenes during our one-year-long
observation of children’s play in the 3-year-olds’ class.
This paper interprets this phenomenon from the perspective of a cognitive model called “predictive coding theory”
[7], which has been the focus of much attention in recent
years in cognitive science. In the predictive coding theory,
our brain makes predictions (or hypotheses) on incomplete
sensory information. By Bayesian updating of the predictions
to eliminate the error against the sensory information, we can
estimate the hidden state (unobservable information) behind
the sensory information. Also, the sensory information can
be modified by acting on the environment to improve its
consistency with the predictions. By the prediction updating
process (perception) inside and the environment updating
process (action) outside in parallel, one can maintain the
alignment between the internal model and the external
environment, increasing capability and adaptability to the
environment.
The following section introduces the robot we used in
our longitudinal observation at the kindergarten. Section III
describes typical cases of children’s pretend play involving
the robot. Section IV interprets and models these cases using
the predictive coding theory. The final section discusses the
ecological and theoretical validity of the present work and
puts it in a future perspective.
II. ROBOT AT A KINDERGARTEN
The robot we used in our observation at the kindergarten
is “Keepon” [8], a simple creature-like robot specially designed for non-verbal interactions with preschool children.
We describe here the design and function of the robot, how

1216

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Geneve. Downloaded on May 13,2025 at 12:22:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

video cameras

microphone
spring

skin of
silicon rubber

120mm

gimbal
drive wires

motor
motion
controller

Fig. 3.

motor
drivers

Keepon with batteries and wireless equipment.

cylindrical case
PC for
fixed cam
remote-control
(tele)

Fig. 1.
±180°

±25°

key operation
mouse
operation
operator
(aka wizard)

­15mm

Fig. 4.

Fig. 2.

Keepon’s movement for expressing attention and emotions.

it is tele-controlled by the researchers, and how we situate it
in the 3-year-olds’ class at the kindergarten.
A. Keepon, the Robot for Children
Keepon is originally developed for research and therapeutic practices for autistic children [9]. As illustrated in Fig. 1,
the yellow body (120mm tall) of silicon rubber has two video
cameras for the eyes and a microphone at the nose. The
internal mechanism, which has 4 degrees of freedom driven
by DC motors with planetary gears and rotary encoders for
quiet and life-like motion, enables the body to express its
attention (by gaze/face direction) and emotion (by rocking
and bobbing the body), as illustrated in Fig. 2. Note that most
of the driving mechanism is enclosed in the lower cylindrical
case to ensure the safety of children interacting physically
with it.
Keepon’s appearance and function stem from the principle
of “minimal design” [8], in which we restrict the amount
of information it emits through its posture and movement.
For autistic children, Keepon’s minimal design enables them
to understand the robot’s attentional and emotional states
without causing sensory information overload [9], [10].
For typically-developing children, which we focus on here,
Keepon’s minimal design allows them to project various
meanings on it. Its face is not expressive but accepts children’s various expectations, such as laughing and crying.
B. Remotely Controlling the Robot
We installed Keepon in a conical casing and covered it
with cushions for children’s safety, as illustrated in Fig. 3. We
also put batteries and wireless equipment in it. Keepon can
autonomously interact with children using visual information
processing of human faces and body motions; however, in

Keepon

operator
Keeponʼs cam
← fixed cam controller

playroom for
3-year-olds
commands
& sound

fixed
cam
(wide)

Keepon’s internal structure and external appearance.
±45°

video &
sound

principalʼs
office

fixed
cam

The setting for remotely controlling the robot at the kindergarten.

our participant observation at the kindergarten, we remotely
control the robot in real-time from another room. The primary reason is that current AI technology does not allow
us to produce socially meaningful responses, such as the
pretense of eating (by bobbing motions) when a child tries
to feed something to it.
Fig. 4 illustrates the remote control set at the kindergarten. We stayed in the principal’s office, where we remotecontrolled the robot in the children’s playroom with the help
of video images from Keepon’s eyes and a fixed pan-tilt
camera installed on the ceiling of the playroom. A wireless
communication system establishes the video, sound, and data
links between the operator and playroom sides. The operator
controls the direction of Keepon’s head by mouse clicks
for ballistic motions or mouse drags for smooth pursuit.
Keystrokes produce bobbing and rocking movements with
artificial sounds, such as “pong-pong-pong”, output from
Keepon’s onboard speaker. Children in the playroom never
see the operator or the tele-controlling system throughout the
observation.
C. Interactions Situated in the Playroom
The human operator consistently remote-controlled
Keepon in the playroom using the graphical interface
shown in Fig. 5. The upper layer shows the images from
(1) Keepon’s onboard camera, (2) the fixed camera for
a close-up view for the operator to understand what is
happening around Keepon, and (3) another fixed camera for
a wider angle of view for figuring out what is happening
in the playroom. The lower part of the interface shows a
360-degree panorama view from Keepon’s viewpoint. Only
the part corresponding to Keepon’s gaze direction updates
in real-time; other surrounding parts are a patchwork of still
images most recently taken by Keepon’s camera when it
directs its gaze toward the directions.
This controlling interface allows the operator to produce

1217
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Geneve. Downloaded on May 13,2025 at 12:22:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(2) fixed cam
(tele)

(1) Keeponʼs cam
(120°×90°)

free play

(3) fixed cam
(wide)

group activity

panorama image
(360°×180°)

Fig. 6.

Keeponʼs
cam →

Keepon in the children’s free play and group activity.

R→

M1

M1

teacher

K

Fig. 5. The graphical interface for situated interaction in the playroom.
(This example is taken in the author’s lab for the explanation.)

(1)

R

socially situated behavior in the company with the children.
Usually, several children in a group surround Keepon simultaneously at the kindergarten, in contrast to the cases
with autistic children, who typically interact with Keepon
one by one. Being surrounded by the children, the operator
can selectively engage with one of the children at a time,
then turn to another child to engage with. Thus, the children
sometimes directly act on Keepon and sometimes observe
others acting on Keepon, having a chance to compare themselves and others.
III. CASE STUDIES
We introduced Keepon to a class of 27 children (12 boys
and 15 girls) and three teachers at the kindergarten. Those
children were 36 to 47 months old at the beginning of
April when schools and kindergartens begin in Japan. The
reason why we especially focused on this age (3 to 4 years
old) is that we wanted to investigate the emergence of the
“Theory of Mind” [11], [12], which would play a crucial
role in their collective pretend play. We carried out 25 series
of longitudinal observations of children-robot interaction in
this class for 12 months from April to March, which means
that those children’s average age during our observation was
around 4.0 years.
Our observation focused on the morning time (8:30 to
11:30 a.m.). The children freely played in their playroom
in the first half (8:30 to 10:00). In the latter half (10:00 to
11:30), they engaged in group activities organized by the
teachers, as shown in Fig. 6. We obtained consent from the
parents before the observation. However, the children did not
know if someone was remotely operating Keepon.
We here describe some of the representative cases we identified as examples of joint prediction to co-create fantasies
among the children. Note that we here processed the pictures
for privacy protection; we translated the children’s utterances
from Japanese and transcribed them using a standard notation
in conversation analysis [13].

K

Fig. 7.

(2)

K

(3)

M1

(4)

Case 1: Children give Keepon a salmon rice ball.

A. Case 1: Keepon and a Salmon Rice Ball
The first case, illustrated in Fig. 7, shows how children’s
pretense on an object was elaborated through verbal and nonverbal interactions among the children and a teacher.
M1 ,R ((Fed a toy block to Keepon together.))
(1) K
((Cutting in and inviting a teacher.)) Look! Here
is Keepon!
M1 ((Facing the teacher.)) Look. He is eating! Look.
He is eating!
Tchr Oh! What is he eating? ((Sat down in the children’s circle.))
∗ M1 ((Smiled to the teacher but cannot answer her.))
K
((Feeding a block to Keepon.)) Have this rice ball!
Tchr A rice ball. What kind of rice ball?
K
((Facing the teacher.)) A salmon rice ball!
(2) Tchr ((Giving a clap and smiling.)) Wow! My favorite
salmon rice ball.
(3) K
Here it is. ((Gave the block to the teacher.))
Tchr ((Pretending to eat it.)) This tastes really good.
K
((Fed the same block to Keepon.))
R
Wow! Eat it! Eat it! Eat the salmon rice ball!
K
He is eating it, eating it!
((Facing the teacher.)) Keepon ate it.
Tchr Keepon ate it. You did it well!
(4) M1 ((Facing the teacher.)) He said it was delicious.
Tchr Yes, he said delicious.
Here we see that M1 did not have a particular assumption
of what food she was feeding Keepon (∗). However, as
the interaction between K and the teacher unfolded, those

1218
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Geneve. Downloaded on May 13,2025 at 12:22:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

R

M2

T

K
T

T

teacher

(1)
A1

(2)
M2

R

(1)

(2)

R

K
L A2

K

T
(3)

← teacher

(4)

(3)

Fig. 8. Case 2: Children take care of Keepon’s head injury. (Note that (3)
and (4) were taken from Keepon’s on-board camera.)

children’s assumptions gradually got detailed into “a rice
ball” and “a salmon rice ball”. As a result, M1 ’s assumption
also got specified (4). The teacher’s intervention worked well
in elaborating a collective expectation among children. She
asked the children step by step what they expected in Keepon
and the blocks, inducing their spontaneous imagination and
coordination.
B. Case 2: Keepon Needs Medication
The second case, illustrated in Fig. 8, shows how the
children’s caretaking behavior toward Keepon gradually expanded and sophisticated as their verbal and non-verbal
actions accumulated around Keepon.
(1) R,T ((Put their weight on Keepon, making a crack in
its head. They found an internal part sticking out
of the head, and awkwardly left the scene.))
(2) K,M2 ((Reported Keepon’s injury to a teacher, saying “an
egg” and “a bump”. The children around Keepon
mentioned “poor” and “painful”.))
(3) K
((Showing an empty cup to Keepon.)) How about
medicine? Need one?
K
((Keepon noded, then K spooned the medicine for
Keepon several times.))
∗ A1 ((Watching K’s behavior, A1 tried to give a toy
dish to Keepon.)) This is Keepon’s dish...
Tchr ((Talking to K.)) Does Keepon take medicine?
K
((Feeding Keepon.)) Yeah, because it makes his
head scar better.
∗ A1 ((Imitating K’s behavior, A1 reached out a spoon
toward Keepon.))
K
Bitter? ((Keepon shook its head.)) Was that OK?
((Keepon nodded.)) Now you need some water.
Water, water... ((K left Keepon for water.))
K
((Returning to Keepon shortly and feeding water to
Keepon.)) It was not bitter. ((Feeding some more
water.)) Now you will be fine!
(4) M2 ((Having observed K’s behavior, brought an empty
cup to Keepon.)) This is milk. Let’s give this milk
to Keepon.

Fig. 9.

T

(4)

Case 3: A child seeks a company to co-create a fantasy.

∗∗ Tchr Is that warm milk?
M
((After thinking for a while.)) It’s cold.
∗∗ Tchr Cold? Warm milk would be better.
M2 ((After thinking.)) Now it has got warmer!
K,M2 ((Feeding Keepon the warm milk together.))
In the episode above, K was the first child to take care
of Keepon by giving it medicine and water (3). Observing
that, A1 tried to imitate K’s behavior superficially (∗), but
M2 understood the meaning of K’s action and extended it
to giving milk to Keepon, first cold and then warm (4). The
teacher’s interventions (∗∗) helped M2 understand what was
especially expected in the shared situation.
C. Case 3: Pretend Play Needs Company
The third case, illustrated in Fig. 9, exemplifies that children’s pretend play sometimes breaks down as the members
leave or join. In the following episode, a child seeks company
to play with after missing her company in the pretend play.
R,T ((Feed Keepon using cups and spoons. T was
worrying about the loosening of Keepon’s eye.))
(1) R
((Looking into Keepon’s eyes.)) Poor, Keepon...
T
((To R.)) He is sick. He is coughing.
(2) R
((Looking up at the distance.)) Coughing...
T
((Stroking Keepon.)) He is coughing. It’s a pity.
T
((After a while, R left Keepon. T cared for Keepon
alone, but T was looking around for others.))
(3) T
((Showing up her spoon for feeding.)) Does anybody want this?
T
((Nobody responded. T threw the spoon away.))
(4) T
((After a while, still not having any company, T
moved Keepon by pushing it toward L and A.))
Here comes Keepon! His name is ‘Keepon.’
L
((Looking into the eyes.)) His eyes are loosening...
((L, A, and T interacted with each other.))
Here we see that pretend play often needs company.
Children have the motivation to share their expectations
with others. Having had a joint engagement, T missed her
playmate R. Then, T tried hard to invite another playmate
but failed. So, T pushed Keepon to slide it on the hardwood

1219
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Geneve. Downloaded on May 13,2025 at 12:22:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

accumulation of activities

fever

ta
ec

initiator

speech & actions

sensory
prediction
information

p
ex

n
tio

perceptual
experience

expectations
medicine

Fig. 10.

interpretation

follower

rice ball

action

Fig. 11.

Bayesian
update

error

Predictive process for generating perceptual experiences.
ry
ina ion
ag at
im pect
ex

l
ica ion
ys a t
ph pect
ex

Initiation and sharing of expectations in pretend play.
visible reality

・・・

floor toward other children nearby, with whom T restarted
unfolding her fantasy to share.

fantasy
generation

IV. JOINT PREDICTION
In the previous section, we examined some cases of
children’s pretend play, exemplifying how fantasies are collectively formed. We here interpret this emergent process
of shared fantasies using the predictive coding theory [7]
and extend this idea to the fundamental model of social
communication.
A. Co-Creation of Fantasy
As we witnessed in these cases, children individually
presume their own imaginations, which weakly determines
the roles of the robot, other children involved, and the objects
in the environment. As illustrated in Fig. 10, a child who
initiates the pretend play performs verbal and non-verbal
actions based on the presumption. Such activity accumulates
around the robot, becoming visible and traceable for the
followers to interpret and share the expectation.
Fantasy creation thus starts from an individual accumulation of pretend actions, but having playmates, extends later
into a collaborative one [5]. At the beginning of the collective interactions, each of the children may have different
presumptions inconsistent with the others. However, as they
interpret other’s activities and perform meaningfully to the
existing accumulation of the activities, their expectations
gradually converge into a consistent one. Thus, the follower
becomes a new participant in the ongoing pretend play to
contribute to further accumulating the activities. We call such
a collectively formed set of consistent expectations “shared
fantasy.”

action

Fig. 12.

error

update

Predictive process in counterfactual pretend play.

the outside world. We also act on the world, such as getting
closer to the object, to change the incoming sensory evidence
so as to minimize the error against the prediction.
We apply this predictive information processing model to
the cognitive process underlying pretend play, as illustrated
in Fig. 12. The left half of the figure shows the same process
as that in Fig. 11, which produces a low-level primary perception of the real world per se. The right half is an additional
generative process that translates the imaginary expectation
into a physical one that can be directly compared with reality.
The predictive error will then be used for updating the
fantastic world, namely the imaginary expectation and how it
translates into a physical one. In addition, the predictive error
can also be decreased by changing the real world through
verbal and non-verbal actions.
C. Collective Creation of Shared Fantasy
Children collectively engage in pretend play. As new
members join in and the story unfolds, the children’s fantasy
expands and sometimes collapses autonomously. As illus-

project and adjust
the fantasy

B. Predictive Information Processing in Pretend Play
We assume that the predictive coding theory [7] can
explain the underlying mechanism for the collective construction of shared fantasies. When we perceive something
out in the world, we project our expectation toward incomplete and ambiguous sensory information coming from the
outside, as illustrated in Fig. 11. Then, our brain computes
the predictive error, which is the difference between the
top-down predictive expectation and the bottom-up sensory
evidence, which guides us to update the expectation using
Bayesian inference, where the original prediction is the prior
belief, the incoming sensation is the likelihood, and the
updated prediction is the posterior belief about the state of

speech
⾔葉

⾔葉

shared fantasy
accumulation
of activities

bodily
entrainment
emotional
contagion

action
⾏為

⾏為
peripheral, then full
participation to the fantasy

Fig. 13.

Collective creation of and engagement in pretend play.

1220
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Geneve. Downloaded on May 13,2025 at 12:22:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

trated in Fig. 13, a child transforms her expectations into
visible activities through projection and adjustment, accumulating them in the real world. When another child joins
in, he estimates the invisible meaning of the robot, objects,
and other children, hidden in the accumulated activities.
This process is a kind of “peripheral participation” [14], in
which the newcomer tries to adapt to the existing imaginary
setting; however, in the later stage, it develops into “full
participation” [14], in which the newcomer modifies and
expands the fantasy collaboratively with others.
The children’s engagement in pretend play anchors in
the following two sources of information, as illustrated
in Fig. 13 again. One is, as mentioned above, the visible
accumulation of activities, such as speech and actions the
children have performed according to their expectations.
The other is the entrainment of their bodily motions and
the contagious resonance of emotional responses. Being
anchored to the world’s objective state and the children’s
resonating subjective states, a “shared fantasy” emerges as
the common field for exchanging perceptions and actions
among the children.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we examined some cases of expectationsharing in pretend play observed in our robot-mediated
interactions with the preschoolers at the kindergarten; then,
we modeled the emergence of “shared fantasy” in their
pretend play using the predictive coding theory. In our model,
children project their imaginary expectations for pretend play
onto the robot and the environment through verbal and nonverbal actions. Those actions accumulate around the robot
and become visible to other children, enabling them to
perform the predictive processing to estimate and elaborate
their collective expectations.
Some studies suggest that our perception is a “controlled
hallucination” [15], which implies that our prediction-based
inference generates our perceptual experiences. In our cases
of pretend play, the children collectively generated, exchanged, and coordinated their counterfactual experiences.
Being anchored on the visible accumulation of their verbal
and non-verbal actions and the resonance of their bodily
motion and emotional responses, the children collectively
produced “shared fantasy” in the same way as “controlled
hallucination.”
Based on our model of the emergence of “shared fantasy,” we can extend the idea to a broader model of social
communication. In our daily life, we understand others’
mental states, such as beliefs, desires, and intentions, and
exchange them with each other for collaboration and for
having a sense of unity [16]. Such a social ability, namely
the “Theory of Mind” [11], [12], is the core of humanspecific traits, but how it emerges and develops in children
is still not known in detail. One of the reasons is that
most past studies dealt mainly with an individual rather than
collective activities in the company of children. Our model
of the emergence of “shared fantasy” would explain how the
intersubjective understanding of others’ expectations emerges

from collaborative activities in the company of children. We
will deeply investigate this broader model in our further
research.
To facilitate the emergence of “shared fantasy” in children,
simple robots like Keepon works well as a pivot for their
exchange of speech and actions [8]. For example, Keepon
can selectively engage with one child through eye contact,
which encourages others to observe how she acts on it. This
functionality enables them to switch between an actor and an
observer, to compare one’s expectation with another’s, and
to co-create the “shared fantasy” to engage collectively.
We here focused on toddlers’ social development; however, the use of robots also applies to the wider field of robotassisted learning and education [17], which includes assisting
older children’s academic and social achievement. Even in
such support, collective activities and sharing imagination are
fundamental to developing children. We will further explore
the advantages of using robots to foster children’s collective
imagination.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author is deeply grateful to the children, their parents,
and the teachers at the kindergarten, also to Dr. Cocoro
Nakagawa and Dr. Marek P. Michalowski, who helped with
the robot-mediated participant observation.
R EFERENCES
[1] P. K. Smith, Social and Pretend Play in Children, in A. D. Pellegrini,
and P. K. Smith (eds.), The Nature of Play: Great Apes and Humans,
The Guilford Press, pp.173–209, 2005.
[2] J. Piaget, Play, Dreams and Imitation in Childhood, Routledge, 1951.
[3] C. Howes, Sharing fantasy: social pretend play in toddlers, Child
Development, vol.56, pp.1253–1258, 1985.
[4] D. G. Singer and J. L. Singer, The House of Make-Believe: Children’s
Play and the Developing Imagination, Harvard University Press, 1990.
[5] A. S. Lillard, Pretend play skills and the child’s theory of mind, Child
Development, vol.64, pp.348–371, 1993.
[6] D. Bergen, The role of pretend play in children’s cognitive development, Early Childhood Research and Practice, vol.4, 2002.
[7] K. Friston, The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory?, Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, vol.11, pp.127–138, 2010.
[8] H. Kozima, M. P. Michalowski and C. Nakagawa, Keepon: a playful
robot for research, therapy, and entertainment, International Journal
of Social Robotics, vol.1, pp.3–18, 2009.
[9] H. Kozima, C. Nakagawa and Y. Yasuda, Children-robot interaction:
a pilot study in autism therapy, Progress in Brain Research, vol.164,
pp.385–400, 2007.
[10] B. Scassellati, H. Admoni and M. Matarić, Robots for use in autism
research, Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering, vol.14, pp.275–
294, 2012.
[11] D. Premack and G. Woodruff, Does the chimpanzee have a theory of
mind?, Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol.1, pp.515–526, 1978.
[12] A. M. Leslie, O. Friedman and T. P. German, Core mechanisms in
‘theory of mind’, Trends in Cognitive Science, vol.8, pp.528–533,
2004.
[13] J. Sidnell, Conversation Analysis: An Introduction, John Wiley & Sons,
2011.
[14] J. Lave and E. Wenger, Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral
Participation, Cambridge University Press, 1991.
[15] A. Seth, Being You: A New Science of Consciousness, Dutton, 2021.
[16] M. Tomasello, M. Carpenter, J. Call, T. Behne and H. Moll, Understanding and sharing intentions: the origins of cultural cognition,
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol.28, pp.675–735, 2005.
[17] A. Augello, L. Daniela, M. Gentile D. Ifenthaler and G. Pilato,
Editorial: robot-assisted learning and education. Frontiers in Robotics
and AI, vol.7, 591319, 2020.

1221
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Geneve. Downloaded on May 13,2025 at 12:22:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

