This paper is under review. Please do NOT cite without permission from the authors.

Children’s anthropomorphism of inanimate agents
Elizabeth J. Goldman* (ORCID: 0000-0002-9973-0649) & Diane Poulin- Dubois*
(ORCID: 0000-0001-8966-875X)
Department of Psychology, Concordia University, Montréal, Canada

*Shared first authorship

Corresponding author: Elizabeth J. Goldman
elizabeth.goldman@concordia.ca
Funding information: This work was supported by an Insight Grant from the Social Science and
Humanities Research Council of Canada awarded to Diane Poulin-Dubois (#435- 2022-0805).
Additional support comes from a Concordia University Horizon Postdoctoral Fellowship to
Elizabeth Goldman.

1

Abstract
This review paper examines the extant literature on animism and anthropomorphism in infants
and young children. A substantial body of work indicates that both infants and young children
have a broad concept of what constitutes a sentient agent and react to inanimate objects as they
do to people in the same situations. The literature has also revealed a developmental pattern in
which animism decreases with age, but social robots appear to be an exception to this pattern.
Additionally, the review shows that children attribute psychological properties to social robots
less so than people but still anthropomorphize them. Importantly, anthropomorphizing of social
robots is dependent upon their morphology and human-like behaviors. The extent to which
children anthropomorphize robots is dependent on their exposure to them and the presence of
human-like features. Based on the existing literature, we conclude that in infancy, a large range
of inanimate objects (e.g., boxes, geometric figures) that display animate motion patterns trigger
the same behaviors observed in child-adult interactions. The review concludes that additional
research is needed to understand what infants and children judge as social agents and how the
perception of inanimate agents changes over the lifespan. As exposure to robots and virtual
assistants increases, future research must focus to better understand the full impact that regular
interactions with such partners will have on children’s anthropomorphizing.
(Word count: 221)
Keywords: anthropomorphism, animacy, social agents, social robots, mentalizing
Word count: 8479
Children’s anthropomorphism of inanimate agents
The concepts of animacy and anthropomorphism, the tendency to perceive inanimate
stimuli as animate and/or sentient, have been topics of study for many decades. In their seminal
study, Heider and Simmel (1944) found that even adults perceive the contingent interactions of
geometric figures as not only alive but also as possessing psychological attributes such as goaldirectedness (for a review, see Scholl & Gao, 2013). Thereafter, a large body of work has
identified several visual cues that contribute to such effects in adults, including self-propulsion
(e.g., Dasser, Ulbaek, & Premack, 1989; Pratt et al., 2010), defying physics (e.g., Gelman,
Durgin, & Kaufman, 1995; Tremoulet & Feldman, 2000), and contingency (e.g., Gao, Newman,
& Scholl, 2009; Gao & Scholl, 2011). Importantly, the perception of animacy seems to appear
early in development and is universal (Barrett et al., 2005; Rutherford & Kuhlmeir, 2013), with

2

the exception of individuals with certain neuropsychological impairments, including autism
spectrum disorder (e.g., Klin, 2000; Rutherford, Pennington, & Rogers, 2006 ) or damage to
some areas of the brain, like the amygdala (e.g., Heberlein & Adolphs, 2004).
It has been well-established that vision enables humans to detect agents and extract
important information about their goals and intentions. A large body of work has been concerned
with when and how children anthropomorphize inanimate objects at implicit and explicit levels.
In a first wave of studies, researchers examined how children (and adults) differentiate the
animates from the inanimates by conducting interviews with a series of images of animals,
artifacts, and plants (Inagaki & Hatano, 1993; Ochiai, 1989; Opfer & Gelman, 2011; Piaget,
1929; Poulin-Dubois & Heroux, 1994; Rakison & Poulin-Dubois, 2001; Tao, 2016). A more
recent wave of studies on animism and anthropomorphism has developed innovative ways to
address the development of anthropomorphism. First, researchers have tested
anthropomorphizing by administering tasks that require implicit judgments in addition to
complementing interview questions that require explicit reasoning. Second, many studies have
created contexts where human agents have been interchanged with inanimate agents to examine
if similar behaviors are observed (e.g., gaze following). Third, with the increasing availability of
social robots, robots have been the focus of many studies, as they allow for the direct
manipulation of predictive cues of animacy (e.g., contingency, human-like morphology). The
present review intends to review this body of work by reporting studies that have examined when
and how children perceive non-human agents (e.g., robots, puppets, animals, artifacts).
Do young children initially perceive all non-human agents as alive and/or sentient? In
other words, do they attribute life to artifacts and human-like properties to non-human agents? A
prominent view argues that anthropomorphism is an acquired perspective that children learn over

3

time as they gain more experiences (Herman, Waxman, & Medin, 2010). Regarding animism, a
dominant view is that it decreases with age (Carey, 1985; Opfer, 2002; Somanader et al., 2011).
If it is the case, when and how does the dissociation between reasoning about life and
psychological properties emerge (Jipson et al., 2016)? In a recent paper, Clark and Fisher (2022)
argued that even adults anthropomorphize artifacts to some extent. In other words, adults
recognize that artifacts are not alive yet treat them as depictions of social agents. When is such
dissociation observed developmentally? Do children believe all agents are like them? In
commentaries to Clark and Fisher's article, developmental psychologists have addressed the
developmental origins of when children see non-human agents (e.g., robots) as depictions of
social agents and as learning sources (Goldman, Baumann, & Poulin-Dubois, 2023b; Haber &
Corriveau, 2023). Importantly, a body of work suggests that infants treat any non-human agent
(e.g., boxes, geometric shapes) that displays animate motion patterns as human-like (Baillargeon,
Scott, & Bian, 2016) but gradually understand what is alive and what is not. The present review
expands upon this important question by attempting to address when and how children
anthropomorphize inanimate objects, including ambiguous objects such as robots, and how
children’s judgments of what constitutes a sentient agent change over time. We first review the
empirical evidence that infants not only prefer and detect animacy cues but display the ability to
associate them with animates. This is reflected in a sizeable body of studies showing that infants
can categorize animates and inanimates by the end of the first year (for a review, see Rakison &
Poulin-Dubois, 2001). Additionally, we demonstrate that both infants and older children
anthropomorphize familiar and unfamiliar artifacts, including robots. Finally, we show that
children gradually understand that artifacts are not alive but can be treated as depictions of social
agents.

4

The animate-inanimate distinction
Piaget was the first to observe children’s animism, which is the belief that inanimates are
capable of sensations, emotions, and intentions (Piaget, 1929). Piaget put forward a stage theory
that examined how children apply consciousness to and make life judgments about different
entities. Piaget believed that children’s judgments of aliveness were based on motion,
specifically whether the item in question could move autonomously. In the first stage, children
apply consciousness broadly to all things, and in the second stage, consciousness is attributed to
things that move. In the third stage, children reserve consciousness to things that can move on
their own; and in the fourth and final stage, children further restrict consciousness to animals.
Piaget believed children’s initial broad application of consciousness was revised as children
gained more experiences. The consensus of recent research is that children are not as animistic as
originally claimed by Piaget, who interviewed children about unfamiliar items (e.g., the wind
and the moon) (Backscheider et al., 1993; Carey, 1985; Dolgin & Behrend, 1984; Opfer &
Gelman, 2011).
Infants’ concept of animacy
One way researchers have studied animism is to examine when infants and children can
correctly categorize both living and non-living things. Since infants and young children are
unable to respond to interview questions or complete tasks with high demands, much of the
research has been based on infants’ manipulation of replicas of animals and artifacts, as well as
looking time measures. This body of work has revealed that by the end of the first year of life,
infants can categorize both animals and vehicles (Mandler, 2003; Poulin-Dubois & Pauen, 2017).
Such precocious categorization abilities are believed to be directed by dynamic information (e.g.,
motion patterns) rather than morphology or color (Caramazza & Shelton, 1998; Leslie, 1994;

5

Mandler, 1992; Premack, 1990). This hypothesis is supported by existing work indicating that
infants display an attentional bias toward social agents and toward the motion patterns
characteristic of animate beings, including contingency, self-propulsion, and the ability to change
direction and speed (Bardi, Regolin, & Simion, 2010; Di Giorgio, 2021; Hofrichter et al., 2021;
Sifre et al., 2018).
Research has shown that infants are biased to attend to humans and other animates early
on in life. For example, newborns show a looking preference for face-like stimuli over other
inanimate objects and process such stimuli using the same cortical pathways that adults do
(Buiatti et al., 2019; Fantz,1963). When controlling for the familiarity of the stimuli, infants as
young as 9 weeks smile and vocalize more towards a person than a doll (Legerstee et al.,1987).
By the age of 3 months, infants show a looking time preference for a person over a monkey toy
(Brazelton et al.,1974). Towards the end of the first year, infants, like adults, perceive the
disappearance of animate objects in a visual image more easily than the disappearance of
inanimate objects (Hofrichter et al., 2021).
The sensitivity to animacy is also expressed in an attentional bias to the motion patterns
that signal animacy (Baker, Pettigrew & Poulin-Dubois, 2014; Gelman, 1990; Mandler, 1992;
Premack, 1990; Saxe, Tzelnic & Carey, 2007; Spelke, Phillips &Woodward, 1995; Surian
&Caldi, 2010). Among the most impressive findings are those showing sensitivity to the motion
patterns of animates within the first 6-months of life. For example, infants differentiate selfpropelled objects from inert ones by the middle of the first year (Leslie & Keeble, 1987; Pauen &
Träuble, 2009). Even 3-month-olds understand that stationary objects will not move unless they
are contacted by another moving object or through an internal mechanism that triggers selfpropelled movement (Luo & Baillargeon, 2005). Additionally, infants recognize self-propulsion

6

and expect different outcomes for physical events that involve self-propelled versus inert objects
(Luo, Kaufman & Baillargeon, 2009). Even newborns can differentiate animate and inanimate
motion (Di Giorgio et al., 2017, 2021), and infants prefer animate motion, such as contingency,
over inanimate motion (Frankenhuis et al., 2013; Rochat et al., 1997). This early bias is not
species-specific, as other mammals also show a preference for animate agents (Lorenzi et al.,
2017; Rosa-Salva et al., 2018). Infants also show a sensitivity to self-propulsion and other
animacy cues (Di Giorgio et al., 2017), presume animate agents will act in a rational way (Csibra
et al., 1999), exhibit goal-directed behavior (Wagner & Carey, 2005), and to abide by the laws of
physics (Arterberry & Bornstein, 2002; Spelke, Phillips, & Woodward, 1995).
But does an early sensitivity to the dynamic features of animacy imply an association to
animacy? Answers to this question have come from studies that exposed infants to inanimate
objects that violate the expectations about how they should move. In one of the first experiments
testing such a link, 8- and 9-month-olds showed surprise (looked longer) when a chair moved on
its own (Golinkoff et al., 1984; Poulin-Dubois & Shultz, 1990) or when a small humanoid robot
moved autonomously (Poulin-Dubois et al., 1996). In another experiment, seven-month-old
infants acted surprised if a shadow that moved on its own and changed speed and direction was
later revealed to be an inanimate object but were not surprised when it was revealed to be an
animal (Träuble et al., 2014). Interestingly, 8-month-old infants identified a violation when it
was revealed that agentive objects are capable of self-propulsion were hollow (Setoh et al.,
2013). Furthermore, Poulin-Dubois et al. (2015) observed that 12-month-old infants who saw
point-light displays of animate motion better categorized animates than those who saw random
motion patterns. These results indicate that biological motion may be one of the motion cues that
serve as the foundation for infants’ understanding of animacy. Taken together, prior work

7

suggests that during the first year of life, infants both prefer animate stimuli and have also
developed a precocious knowledge about the agency characteristics associated with animacy.
Young children’s concept of animacy
A developmental pattern emerges when older children are tested in interviews with images
of animals, people, artifacts, and plants. A review of this body of literature indicates that overall
young children tend to accurately categorize animals as animate and artifacts as inanimate but
struggle to classify plants as living. For example, Hatano et al. (1993) investigated cultural
differences in children’s understanding of biology and how children classify something as living
or non-living. The study included kindergarteners, second graders, and fourth graders from three
countries (Japan, Israel, and the United States). Children were asked if plants, animals, and
people were living or non-living. The results indicated that children, regardless of age and
country, understood that inanimates, plants, animals, and people had different properties.
Overall, children were least accurate about the properties of plants, the Israeli children tended to
classify plants as non-living, and the Japanese children anthropomorphized inanimate objects the
most. In a related study by researchers Richards and Siegler (1986), children responded to the
question, “Can you tell me how things that are alive are different from things that are not alive?”
The children thought that animals and plants had few properties in common, despite plants and
animals both being alive. The researchers found that 5-year-olds almost never named
characteristics that belonged to both animals and plants. Instead, children listed characteristics
true of animals but not plants (e.g., movement). Interestingly, most of the 5-year-olds thought
that plants were non-living, but all of them knew that animals were living.
Similarly, Inagaki and Hatano (1996) asked children ranging from 4 to 11 years of age,
“What is an X?” Children were shown pictures of plants, animals, and artifacts. Next, children

8

responded to questions like “Is X living?” and “Why do you think X is living or non-living?” A
majority of 5-year-olds justified that plants and animals were living things using three criteria:
the ability to grow, the need to eat/drink, and the idea that living things could become ill. When
children were asked if plants had the same characteristics that animals do, the children said that
plants grew, needed to eat/drink to survive, and died eventually,
Work by Fouquet, Megalakaki, and Labrell (2017) examined the biological properties 3and 6-year-olds attribute to animals, plants, and artifacts. Children viewed pictures of animals,
artifacts, and plants and were then asked about different biological properties (i.e., the ability to
move, grow, eat, reproduce, become ill, die, and age). Although the 3-year-olds attributed more
properties to animals compared to artifacts and plants, the attribution of biological properties to
animals increased with age. Yet, the attribution of properties to plants remained constant with
age. These findings suggest that animism is well developed by age 3 years except for plants and
other ambiguous objects (e.g., robots). The literature review thus far has focused on research
studies where children were requested to make judgments about the animacy of common things
that children are likely familiar with (e.g., animals, clear inanimate objects) as well as ambiguous
objects, like plants. This body of literature shows that children tend to deny life to plants as they
lack animate cues (e.g., movement). More recent studies have focused on robots that though not
alive, have animacy, as robots are the opposite of plants which are alive but lack some of the
animacy characteristics we see in animals and humans. For example, in work by Saylor et al.
(2010) 3- and 4-year-olds were asked to attribute properties of both living things and machines to
different artifacts (e.g., a robot, a human girl, a camera). Children were presented with images of
the artifacts and asked questions typically associated with living things (e.g., can see, think, is
alive) and questions associated with machines (e.g., is a tool, has wires). Children provided

9

justifications for their responses. Justifications included five categories: kind (label), internal
features (stuff on the inside), origin explanation (where it came from), external explanations
(surface features visible to the eye), size, and function (what it was used for). Both age groups
attributed properties of living things to the girl more than the robot or camera. Only the 4-yearolds classified the robot as a machine. Overall, older children were more accurate in their
classification of both living and non-living things.
Okanda and colleagues (2021) asked 3-year-olds, 5-year-olds, and adults to attribute
different type of properties to a humanoid robot (Kirobo) before and after interacting with it. The
properties included: Biological (e.g., eating), artifact (e.g., can this one break?), psychological
(e.g., thinking,), and perceptual (e.g., seeing). Overall, the 3-year-olds performed poorer than the
older groups on most of these properties. They found that after the interaction, both 5-year-olds
and adults attributed more properties (psychological and perceptual) to the robot. In contrast,
after the interaction with the robot, the 3-year-olds no longer attributed properties to the robot
(biological, psychological, and perceptual). In other words, the youngest children were more
likely to think the robot was an artifact. These results suggest that younger children could have
limited understanding that a robot is an artifact but the ambiguity of the robot and the fact the
human-like morphology of the robot (e.g., had a head, torso, and arms) may have contributed to
the 3-year-old's uncertainty about whether the robot has biological properties. Similarly, Kim et
al. (2019) demonstrated a transition between the ages of 3 and 4 years.
Recent work has tested the concept of animacy in a more direct way with tasks like a
naïve biology task (Gottfried & Gelman, 2005). Beyond interviews, Gottfried and Gelman
(2005) used a naïve biology task to investigate if children assigned biological or mechanical
internal parts to unfamiliar plants, animals, and artifacts. The 3-,4-, and 5- year-olds were asked

10

to decide if something biological (e.g., heart) or mechanical (e.g., battery) belonged inside
unfamiliar plants, animals, or artifacts. They found that the younger children assigned fewer
correct internal parts compared to the older children. These findings indicate that by 5 years of
age, children are better at judging internal parts (mechanical or biological) of plants, animals,
and artifacts.
In a recent study, Goldman, Baumann, & Poulin-Dubois (2023a) adapted Gottfried and
Gelman's (2005) task and asked children whether unfamiliar animals, artifacts, and robots had
mechanical or biological insides. Both age groups (3- and 5-year-olds) knew animals had
biological insides and artifacts had mechanical insides. However, only older children thought
that robots had mechanical insides, whereas the younger children assigned both biological and
mechanical insides to the robots equally. These results suggest that by 5 years of age, children
understand the internal parts of different entities (i.e., robots, animals, and artifacts).
Another task-based measure developed by Hermann, Waxman, and Medin (2010) used
an inductive-reasoning task to determine whether young children anthropomorphize. Children
were asked whether novel properties (e.g., “Do x’s have an omentum?”) could be found inside
various objects, including humans, animals, plants, and artifacts. For each property, the
experimenter asked whether the object in question had the property inside – two puppets
responded (one puppet answered “Yes” while the other answered “No”). Then, the children
indicated which puppet was correct. These findings indicate that 5-year-olds anthropomorphize
but that younger children, the 3-year-olds, do not. This suggests that anthropomorphizing is
something that children learn to do over time, particularly between the ages of 3 and 5 years.
Kominsky, Shatto, and Bonawitz (2021) examined whether preschool children expected
animate agents to have biological internal properties. Preschoolers were shown videos of two

11

different puppets. Although both puppets were covered in fur, only one puppet was selfpropelled. Preschoolers were also presented with images of familiar artifacts (i.e., a motorcycle)
and a familiar animal (i.e., a sheep). Children selected whether something biological, something
mechanical, or nothing at all belonged inside these puppets, artifacts, and animals. The children
were less likely to think that the self-propelled puppet was empty compared to the puppet which
was unable to move by itself. However, preschoolers had no biological expectations despite the
fact that they knew animals had biological insides and artifacts had mechanical insides.
Importantly, these results suggest that preschoolers lack specific biological expectations about
animate agents, even though they know that agents should not be empty. In sum, prior work
suggests that animism decreases as children grow older (Bullock, 1985; Carey, 1985; Jipson et
al., 2016; Opfer, 2002; Somanader et al., 2011), although it may not disappear completely in the
presence of certain powerful animacy cues (Opfer, 2002).
Developmental changes in anthropomorphizing
Beyond the judgment of animacy, more recent work has focused on anthropomorphizing
using artificial stimuli (e.g., robots, geometric figures) that vary in their animate features. Using
artificial stimuli provides many benefits. First, using stimuli that are not alive yet exhibit animate
characteristics complements plants that are alive but lack some of the animacy characteristics
seen in humans and animals (e.g., autonomous movement, speech, facial features). Second,
plants and artificial stimuli are ambiguous as they possess both animate and inanimate
characteristics. An important question to consider is how much anthropomorphizing young
children do to these artificial stimuli that can, in some contexts and situations, serve as nonhuman social partners or agents. Although Piaget believed that infants anthropomorphize
artifacts (e.g., non-human agents), recent work has yielded contradicting findings.

12

To better understand how and when, developmentally, infants and children
anthropomorphize, researchers have exposed children to an ecologically valid context that
involves non-human agents to examine whether children treat these agents as depictions of social
agents. Additionally, these contexts can determine if and how children react to non-human
agents as they would human agents. Our tendency to anthropomorphize, to see human-like traits
such as intentions and beliefs, increases as the non-human entity takes on more animate
characteristics (Broadbent, 2017). There are a number of cues that have been shown to trigger
anthropomorphism and animate judgments toward non-human agents. Importantly, when nonhuman agents exhibit these cues, this can lead to a variety of different levels of
anthropomorphism (e.g., intentions, goal-directedness, learning). Below, we explore these
different levels with studies that examined infants' and children’s behaviors about non-human
agents directly to human agents.
Gaze following
The ability to follow the gaze of others plays an important part in our ability to both
communicate and interact with others (Argyle & Cook, 1976). Unlike other species, humans pay
attention to other people’s gaze as a source of information, as gaze following can strongly
indicate another’s intentions and future actions (Clifford & Palmer, 2018). Following the gaze of
an agent is in itself low-level anthropomorphizing. The conditions which lead to gaze following
in young children have been well-studied by researchers. Prior research has shown that 12- to 18month-olds follow the gaze of a person looking at targets but stop doing so when that person’s
view of the targets is obscured (e.g., closed eyes, a blindfold, target covered by an opaque
screen) (Brooks & Meltzoff, 2002; Butler, Caron, & Brooks, 2000; Dunphy-Lelii & Wellman,
2004; Moll & Tomasello, 2004). In another study, 12-month-olds followed the gaze of an

13

asymmetrical object when the object had facial features and behaved in a contingent manner
(Johnson, Slaughter, & Carey, 1998). Gaze following changes with age, specifically with the
ability to follow the head developing before the ability to follow eyes (Brooks & Meltzoff, 2005;
Carpenter, Nagell, & Tomasello, 1998; Moore & Povinelli, 2007; Mundy et al., 2007).
Prior work has examined what conditions and situations lead to following the gaze of
others (Akhtar & Gernsbacher, 2008; Beier & Spelke, 2012; Capparini, To, & Reid, 2023).
Adults and older children pay attention to a person who adjusts their head in the direction of an
object. Yet they fail to do so if a swivel chair spins or a teapot turns. How does one determine
whether a gazer is worth following? How does an infant recognize a gazer’s importance? Is gaze
following interpreted as referential when the agent is non-human? Many studies have tested
adults to address these questions (for a review, see Admoni & Scassellati, 2017). For infants,
interpreting robot gaze appears to be dependent upon whether the robot is judged to be a social
agent. In the first study to investigate infants’ gaze following with robots, O’Connell et al. (2009)
had a humanoid robot teach novel words to 18-month-olds. As the infant and robot held two
different unfamiliar objects, the robot gazed at either the infant’s toy or at its own toy and labeled
it (e.g., “That is a Dax”). Infants followed the robot’s gaze at the target object when it labeled the
novel object in both conditions. Subsequent work reported that only when a long turn-taking
interaction was observed by the infant between a humanoid robot and an experimenter did 18month-olds follow the robot’s gaze (Meltzoff et al., 2010). The fact that the robot in O’Connell's
study displayed salient animacy cues (e.g., very large eyes and speech) might explain these
conflicting findings. More recently, an eye-tracking study showed that the anticipatory eye gaze
of 12-month-olds only shifts in response to the referential gaze of a human agent but not a robot
agent (Okumura et al., 2013a). However, when infants are shown videos of human and robot

14

agents looking at objects, they can follow the gaze of both agents. Still, infants look longer at the
objects the human gazed at (Okumura et al., 2013b). Similarly, researchers have shown that
infants only imitate a robot’s actions if the robot engages in mutual gaze with a human (Itakura
et al., 2008). These findings suggest that robot gaze is not as meaningful as human gaze, yet it
can become more meaningful through social interaction. More recently, Manzi, Ishikawa, et al.
(2020) showed 17-month-old infants videos that featured a human or a robot (Robovie)
completing an action. The agents gazed at a cup, the target object (congruent), or an empty space
(incongruent). The findings indicate that infants prioritized attending to the face of the agents
and were attentive to initial eye contact from both agents. However, they were more engaged by
the human agent’s gaze. Additionally, infants attended to the target more quickly when they
watched the human agent. Although perceptive of some of the robot's human-like morphology
(facial features, ability to make eye contact), the infants failed to recognize the robot’s referential
gaze.
Importantly, prior work has shown that even adults will follow the gaze of inanimate
objects (e.g., a pointer) (Breil et al. 2019). Adults will follow the gaze of a face but will also do
so for stimuli that have no eyes (e.g., arrows). These results suggest that adults act like the arrow
is a pair of eyes, as they direct their gaze and attention to where the arrow is pointing. Thus, gaze
following is an implicit form of anthropomorphizing and continues to be important in our
evaluation of animacy across the lifespan.
Goals and intentions
Previous research has demonstrated that infants in the first year of life are capable of
attributing goals to other people (Woodward, 1998). Importantly, the ability to attribute goals
during infancy predicts better performance in mentalizing tasks at preschool age (Aschersleben

15

et al., 2008; Yamaguchi et al., 2009). The classic paradigm to test goal attribution is a novel
preference task (e.g., Woodward 1998, 1999). In the standard task, 5- to 12-month-olds watch
familiarization trials where an agent reaches for and grasps one of two objects (grasped object
A). In test, the location of the objects is swapped, and the agent reaches for object A (old-object)
or object B (new-object). Infants look longer when the agent reaches for the new object, object
B. This suggests that infants attribute object A as the agent's goal or preferred object. Infants are
also able to identify the goals of the agent in imitation tasks. For example, prior work has found
that infants tend to imitate intentional actions (“There!”) more so than accidental ones
(“Woops”) (e.g., Carpenter et al., 1998, Olineck & Poulin-Dubois, 2005). Additionally, infants
will duplicate intended outcomes after observing an incomplete demonstration or a successful
one at roughly equal rates (e.g., Meltzoff 1995, Olineck & Poulin-Dubois 2009); and they are
sensitive to goal-relevant actions, reproducing them more than goal-irrelevant ones (e.g.,
Brugger et al., 2007, Carpenter et al., 2005).
What about goal attribution to non-human agents? Early research in the classic goal
attribution paradigm reported that infants interpret the goals of a human hand and an inanimate
claw differently (Woodward 1999). However, in subsequent work that modified the Woodward
(1998) paradigm, Hofer et al. (2005), 9- and 12-month-olds observed a mechanical claw that
performed an action. Only the 12-month-olds interpreted the mechanical claw’s action as being
goal-directed. In a second study, the 9-month-olds received information that showed that a
human had operated and controlled the mechanical claw. The results indicated that this
additional information (a human controlled the claw) allowed the 9-month-olds to interpret the
claw’s action as goal-directed (Hofer et al., 2005). In another study, Kamewari and colleagues
(2005) investigated if 6.5-month-olds interpret goal-directed actions differently depending upon

16

the agent (human or non-human). The findings showed that infants attributed goals to humans
but not to a box that moved autonomously. Furthermore, two studies have shown that infants
view the actions of a self-propelled box as being goal-directed, suggesting that infants will
attribute goals to anything they view as being an agent (Luo & Baillargeon, 2005; Luo & Choi,
2013). This was extended to 3-month-olds in a subsequent set of experiments (Luo, 2010). There
is also evidence that by 6 months, goal attribution is linked to biological motion (Schlottmann &
Ray, 2010).
The attribution of goals and intentions to non-human agents has also been examined
using robots (Itakura et al., 2008; Kocher et al., 2020; Manzi et al., 2022; Somanader et al.,
2011). In one study, researchers investigated whether toddlers would imitate the goal-directed
actions of a robot (Itakura et al., 2008). Toddlers (ranging from 24 to 35 months) watched videos
that featured a robot attempting to but failing to place beads into a cup. The researchers
manipulated whether or not the robot made eye contact. The toddlers only imitated the robot’s
actions when the robot made eye contact. These findings indicate that human-like gaze, rather
than human-like morphology, could be a critical factor in children’s decision to imitate the goaldirected actions of a non-human agent.
Prior work has shown that when evaluating whether something unfamiliar (i.e., a blob) is
alive, young children and adults take into consideration the blob’s capacity for goal-directed
movement (Opfer, 2002). In older children, research has not been about attributing goals but
rather manipulating goal-directedness and observing its impact on anthropomorphizing. One way
to do this is to have the agents demonstrate a goal-directed action (e.g., reaching for an object).
Next, we zoom in on research that focuses on the importance of goal-directedness and intentions
in interactions non-human social partners have with children. In fact, when a social partner

17

shows intentionality, children tend to attribute animate qualities. A study by Meltzoff (1995)
examined whether young children would reproduce what the adult did over what the adult had
intended. The children watched an adult who had tried but failed to complete specific actions.
The findings revealed that even unsuccessful or failed attempts could help children infer the
actions that were intended. In a follow-up that featured an inanimate object, children failed to
produce the target actions. This suggests that children can follow the intentions and goals of a
person more easily than they can inanimate objects.
Non-human agents' intentionality can also be judged by other cues, like their ability to
move autonomously. In a study by Somanader, Saylor, and Levin (2011), 4 and 5-year-olds
interacted with an experimenter and a robot. The robot had eyes and one arm but otherwise
lacked human features. Children were assigned to one of two conditions: Autonomous (robot
moved autonomously) or controlled (a remote-controlled robot). Two balls were placed on the
table, and the robot moved toward one of the balls and hit it. In the autonomous condition, the
robot moved autonomously and independently, whereas, in the controlled condition, it looked
like an experimenter directed the robot using a remote control. The 5-year-olds differentiated the
remote-controlled robot from the autonomous robot, yet children a year younger were unable to
make this distinction. Thus, children who see the robot moving autonomously may infer that the
autonomous robot intended to hit that specific ball off the table. In comparison, children may be
less likely to attribute goal-directedness to a robot that performed that same action, hitting the
ball off the table, if the robot was controlled by a remote control.
Additionally, researchers have examined whether children will help a non-human social
partner. For example, will young children recognize a robot’s intentions and help the robot
complete its task as infants complete an unfulfilled goal? Kocher et al. (2020) examined whether

18

children identified a robot’s failure and correct it. Working with a non-humanoid robot, children
aged 3 to 7 years of age completed a collaborative building task. The findings indicated that the
autonomous movement of the robot led to most of the children attempting to help the robot.
Additionally, the researchers found that children engaged with the robot and treated it as a social
partner.
Mental states
The spontaneous understanding of others’ beliefs, desires, emotions, and intentions is
defined as Theory of Mind (Wellman, 2014). Agents are those we attribute mental states to, and
agents can include people, animals, and even inanimate objects that display animacy cues. Some
researchers believe that infants possess an innate concept of an agent that is like the hard-wired
language-learning mechanism that is characteristic of our species (Luo & Choi, 2013). Of
importance are true and false belief scenarios. A true belief is when one’s belief is in line with
reality. A false belief is when one’s belief is not in line with reality (e.g., believing an object is
one location when it is actually located in a different one). A widely used false belief task is the
Sally-Anne task. In this task, children must decide where Sally will look for her marble after
Anne moved it to a new location when Sally is not present (Baron-Cohen et al., 1985). This
explicit task requires the participant to provide their response verbally. In contrast, implicit false
belief tasks are measured via looking time (e.g., how long the participant looks at the scene). For
example, Onishi and Baillargeon (2005) tested 15-month-old's false belief understanding using a
violation-of-expectation paradigm (VOE). VOE tasks examine if infants look longer (i.e., find
something surprising) when an agent’s behavior is inconsistent with their beliefs. In a
familiarization phase, an agent played with a toy and then placed the toy inside a green box.
Next, the toy changed location (e.g., moved from a green box to a yellow box) when the agent

19

was present or absent. In test, infants saw the agent reach into the green or the yellow box. If the
infants anticipated that the agent would look for her toy based on her belief about its location
(and not its actual location), then infants would look longer when that expectation was violated.
The findings supported the predictions and suggested that infants could attribute both true and
false beliefs. Baillargeon and colleagues (2010, p. 110) stated that “false-belief understanding
provides evidence for a sophisticated (and possibly uniquely human) ability to consider the
information available to an agent when interpreting and predicting the agent’s actions – even if
this information is inaccurate and incompatible with one’s own.”
The original false belief study was conducted with human agents. However, replications
have been published with non-human agents that possess a variety of animacy characteristics.
Prior research has shown that infants can ascribe beliefs to mechanical toy cranes (Burnside,
Severdija, & Poulin-Dubois, 2019), geometric shapes (Surian & Geraci, 2012), and blobs that
engage in turn-taking by emitting sounds and lights (Tauzin & Gergely, 2018). Another
paradigm used to test false belief attribution, an anticipatory-looking task, has also been tested
with cartoon animals (Southgate et al., 2007) and geometric figures (Surian & Franchin, 2020).
Thus, the early mentalizing view argues that the ability to reason about mental states is not
restricted to animate objects but to agents. Agents can display both mechanical (e.g., selfpropulsion) and actional properties (e.g., goal-directed behavior) (Carey, 2009; Csibra, 2008;
Leslie, 1994; Scholl & Tremoulet, 2000; Surian & Caldi, 2010). In sum, while morphological
features are often linked to animals (e.g., eyes, limbs, and biological motion) and can be used for
the purpose of categorization, the early mentalizing view states that these features are not
necessary or adequate to prompt mentalizing in infants. If infants understand the actions of
inanimates (e.g., chasing shapes, communicating blobs) in line with their mental states, this is

20

evidence that infants mentalize about agents, even those without those animal-like features (see
Kano et al., 2019 for related findings on apes).
In older children and adults, anthropomorphizing of mental states has been studied using
interviews. Some prior work conducted by Beran et al. (2011) investigated whether children (5to 16 -years old) attribute human qualities to a robotic arm. The robotic arm had eyes and a
mouth; however, these facial features never changed during the interaction. Children observed
the robotic arm attempt to complete a specific goal. The robotic arm in this study picked up and
stacked six blocks. After stacking each block, the robot moved its “face” to look at the child.
Children reported having a positive overall impression of the robot. However, most of the
children believed the robot was incapable of having feelings or emotions. When asked to justify
their responses, children attributed this to the lack of human-like features and facial expressions.
More recently, research with older children has tended to focus on children’s interactions with a
specific type of non-human agent, robots (for a review of Theory of Mind and robots, see
Marchetti et al. (2018)). Understanding that someone can intentionally lie is part of Theory of
Mind (ToM). For example, Peretti et al. (2023) examined whether 5-and 6-year-olds could
differentiate between intentionally and unintentionally false statements that were made by a
human and a humanoid robot. Children were less critical of the lies of a robot compared to those
of a human. Zhang and colleagues (2019) used two task-based measures, the change-of-location
false belief task (Wimmer & Perner, 1983) and the unexpected-contents false belief task (Perner
et al., 1987), to investigate how children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and typically
developing children attribute false beliefs to a robot. The results indicated that typically
developing children attributed false beliefs to the robot more than children with ASD.

21

In work by Manzi et al. (2020), young children aged 5, 7, and 9 years were asked to
attribute mental states to two robots (NAO and Robovie). The findings revealed that younger
children (the 5-year-olds) anthropomorphized robots more than older children. Both 7- and 9year-olds attributed mental states to both robots. However, they attributed more mental states to
the NAO robot. Manzi and colleagues (2020) concluded that children attributed more mental
states to a humanoid robot (NAO) but attributed fewer mental states to both robots compared to
humans.
Di Dio et al. (2020) evaluated whether preschoolers would attribute mental states to a
social partner (human or robot) after a social interaction. The researchers found that the older
children, the 7-year-olds trusted the robot more than the human agent. Whereas 3-year-olds
trusted the human more. Overall, fewer mental states were attributed to the robot compared to
the human. However, children behaved the same way when they related to both agents. These
results indicate that children can establish meaningful relationships with both human and robot
agents. In recent work by Oranç & Küntay (2020), the more perceptual abilities children
attributed to a robot (e.g., can the robot see or be tickled?), the more likely the children opted to
learn novel information from the robot compared to an adult.
More recently, a study by Goldman, Baumann, and Poulin-Dubois (2023a) examined
children’s anthropomorphism of robots, animals, and artifacts by asking 3 and 5-year-olds to
respond to interview questions (psychological questions: the ability to talk, think, and feel;
biological question: is alive). To examine whether morphology plays a role in children's
anthropomorphizing, both a non-humanoid robot (Dash) and a humanoid robot (NAO) were
used. Regardless of the questions (psychological or biological), children responded similarly.
Specifically, the younger children attributed animacy to the robots, animals, and artifacts at

22

chance level. In contrast, 5-year-olds knew that animals were animate, and that artifacts, and the
non-humanoid robot (Dash) were inanimate. Crucially, the 5-year-olds were unsure about the
animacy of the humanoid robot (NAO), performing at chance level. These results suggest that
the 5-year-olds were uncertain of the psychological properties of a robot that is human-like in its
morphology. Thus, morphology can play an important role in children’s judgments of animacy.
These findings demonstrate that young children infer mental states to a greater extent to robots
when they display animate qualities, and the number of mental states children attribute to
different non-human agents can vary.
Learning
A large body of literature has explored whether children can learn from non-human social
agents, as learning is evidence of anthropomorphism. Non-human agents can interact with people
during their everyday experiences. Whom children learn from is an important question, and
researchers have examined whether children will learn from non-human social partners. A large
body of prior research has examined whether children can learn from tablets, computers, and
social media (Danovitch & Alzahabi, 2012; Tong et al., 2022; Yan, 2006). In this review paper,
we zoom in on children’s abilities to learn from robots. For a review of children’s trust in social
robots as informants, see Stower et al. (2021). Learning has been assessed in many ways, for
example, how non-verbal cues can impact a child’s ability to learn from non-human agents. In
one of the first studies to investigate this question, O’Connell et al. (2009) showed18-month-olds
a robot that provided a novel label for an object. Infants followed the robot’s gaze toward the
object but failed to learn the novel labels, even when they observed a brief contingent interaction
between a human experimenter and the robot.

23

In one study, researchers Kennedy, Baxter, and Belpaeme (2017) investigated whether
robots’ nonverbal behaviors can provide social cues and aid in learning. Specifically, researchers
were interested in whether adults and child participants perceived a difference in robots with
high and low levels of nonverbal immediacy. Gestures, gazes, intonation, and body language
were used to establish different levels of immediacy. Adult participants and children (M = 7.8
years old) were assigned to a robot with high nonverbal behaviors, a robot with low nonverbal
behaviors, or a human. Participants listened to a short story that was read by either the human or
the robot agent, depending upon the condition. After the story, a recall test was administered.
The findings demonstrated that both children and adults perceived the nonverbal behaviors of the
robots. Importantly, children’s recall of the story improved when the story was read by the robot
with high non-verbal behaviors. Thus, nonverbal behaviors such as eye gaze, body positioning,
and vocal intonation should be considered when designing robots for both adults and children.
In another study, children (4 to 6 years of age) played a game with a robot over the
course of 2 months (Kory-Westlund & Breazeal, 2019). In the storytelling game, the story level
was either matched or unmatched to the child’s language ability. The researchers found that as
time went on, children emulated the robot more and that children who did emulate more scored
higher on the vocabulary posttest. When the story level was matched to the child’s own language
ability, children emulated more. Thus, young children can learn from a robot, particularly a robot
that matches their skill and ability level. In a recent study, Oranç and Küntay (2020) found that
the more 3- to 6-year-olds attributed perceptual abilities to the robot (e.g., can the robot see or be
tickled?), the more likely they were to select the robot instead of a human for learning novel
information.

24

Another way to look at whether children can learn from non-human social partners is to
examine whether children will imitate or overimitate (copy unnecessary actions) them. In a
recent paper, Schleihauf et al. (2020) examined if children would imitate the irrelevant actions
completed by a human and a robot at similar rates. Children who were 5 to 6 years of age saw an
agent (human or robot) open a puzzle box to obtain a reward. Children copied the demonstrated
actions of both agents, suggesting that both human and non-human agents can lead to overimitation in children.
Recent research has examined whether young children can learn from social robots.
Some of this recent work has examined selective social learning, defined as the ability to know
whom to learn from (Harris & Corriveau, 2011; Juteau et al., 2019; Poulin-Dubois & BrosseauLiard, 2016; Sobel & Finiasz, 2020). In these studies, informants, human or non-human, are
pitted against each other to determine whom children will elect to learn from. For example,
Breazeal and colleagues (2016) demonstrated that young children learned new words from robots
that resembled stuffed animals. In a study by Moriguchi et al. (2011), preschoolers watched a
video where either a human or a robot labeled novel objects. Children were then required to
select the objects using the labels provided in the video. The results revealed that children who
watched the video with the human agent selected more correct objects than those who saw the
video with the robot. Nevertheless, the five-year-olds who saw the robot video performed above
chance levels but the younger children, the 4-year-olds, did not. In another study, Kory-Westlund
et al. (2017) had children aged 2 to 5 years view pictures of unfamiliar animals with either a
robot or a human agent. Both agents named the unfamiliar animals shown in the pictures. On a
recall test, children performed equally well regardless of which agent (human or robot) provided
the names.

25

Building upon prior work, researchers have sought to vary the epistemic characteristics
(e.g., accuracy, competency, confidence) of two social agents. In a recent paper, Baumann et al.
(2023) presented children with an incompetent human agent and a competent humanoid robot,
NAO. They found that 5-year-old children elected to learn the novel words from a robot that had
demonstrated competency when the human agent had shown incompetency. In contrast, the
younger children, 3-year-olds, opted to endorse the labels provided by both informants, the
competent robot and the incompetent human, at equal rates. In a follow-up study, the researchers
replaced the humanoid-looking robot, NAO, with a non-humanoid-looking robot, Cozmo. As the
robot agent looked even less human-like, this was a conservative test of the importance of
epistemic characteristics. The results mirrored those of Study 1, which featured the humanoid
robot NAO. The 3-year-olds continued to be unsure about whom to learn from, whereas the 5year-olds prioritized competency and opted to learn new words from the robot.
Some of this work presents children with two non-human agents rather than pit a human
agent against a robot. Breazeal and colleagues (2016) had 3- and 5-year-olds interact with two
"DragonBots" robots. Both robots had eyes, wings, and fur. One of the robots behaved
contingently (was engaged, looked at the child), and the other robot exhibited non-contingent
behavior (was disengaged, looked away from the child). First, the participants were greeted by
both robots and encouraged to tell the robots about their favorite animal. Next, the robot told the
child about their favorite animal (an animal that was likely unfamiliar to children at this age).
Children recalled information provided by both robots and correctly indicated which of the novel
animals were the robot's favorites. Crucially, children preferred to ask the contingent robot for
additional information about the novel animal. Thus, it appears that children are more likely to
treat a robot as knowledgeable if the robot behaves contingently.

26

In a study by Brink and Wellman (2020), young children (3 to 4 years of age) watched
two humanoid robots (NAO) label familiar and unfamiliar objects. The two robots were identical
except for their color; one had orange accents, the other purple. One of the robots provided the
children with accurate labels (i.e., competent), whereas the other gave inaccurate labels (i.e.,
incompetent). The findings revealed that children learned from and trusted information that had
been supplied by the robots (i.e., names for novel items). However, children trusted information
that had been provided by the accurate robot more than they trusted information from the
inaccurate robot. In addition to word learning, a line of work has emerged that focuses on
whether robots can help children learn a second language (Kanda et al., 2004; Kennedy et al.,
2015). For a summary of word learning with robots, please see Vogt et al. (2017).
Conclusion
In conclusion, the extant research on animism and anthropomorphizing indicates that
infants and young children have a broad concept of what constitutes a sentient agent. Although it
is unknown whether preverbal infants believe that inanimate objects are alive or not, they react to
them as they react to people in the same situations. We saw that some motion cues are
particularly powerful in triggering anthropomorphic behaviors in infants, such as self-propulsion
and goal-directedness. Findings from a large body of literature have revealed a developmental
pattern in that animism decreases with age, even when unfamiliar stimuli are human-like in their
morphology. Three-year-olds already attribute more biological properties to animals than
artifacts but less so than 5-year-olds. This developmental pattern has been confirmed when
children are asked about the insides of animals and artifacts. Children of that age are also
accurate about the inside of artifacts and animals but uncertain about unfamiliar and ambiguous
artifacts, like robots. Thus, robots are a more conservative test of animism because of their

27

salient agency properties, making them a form of hybrid artifacts. In comparison, 5-year-olds
correctly infer that robots are artifacts, even if they have never had experience with robots.
With regard to anthropomorphism, more specifically attributing psychological properties
to inanimate but social agents, is present in infancy. This has been demonstrated in studies
showing that they tend to behave with inanimate agents as if human as long as they display
typical motion patterns of animates. At a later stage of development, children still
anthropomorphize but tend to attribute psychological properties to robots less so than people.
The extent to which children anthropomorphize robots is dependent upon both the robot’s
behaviors and whether the robot has human-like morphology. However, much of the research on
the attribution of sentience to artifacts, like robots, have been based on interviews that could over
or underestimate children’s anthropomorphizing. Like in the case of animism, future research
should make children reason about artifacts’ sentience by testing them in situations where they
typically mentalize when humans are involved. In a first attempt with such a design, the Theory
of Mind Scale (Wellman & Liu, 2004) was administered to 4-year-olds using figurines
representing a humanoid robot (NAO) or a person as the protagonist. Children tended to attribute
mental states more often in the human condition confirming previous research based on
interviews (Goldman, Baumann, Beaudoin, & Poulin Dubois, 2023c).
In conclusion, the present review has examined how children perceive inanimate objects,
including social robots. In a recent article published in Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Clark and
Fischer (2022) argued that adults treat social robots as depictions of social agents. In reaction to
their paper, many commentators have argued that robots though not human are not merely
depictions of social agents but are considered genuine social agents (Eng et al., 2023; Orgs &
Cross, 2023). Others have argued that increased exposure to virtual assistants may lead both

28

children and adults to categorize robots as members of a unique ontological category (GirouardHallam & Danovitch, 2023; Kim et al., 2019). In another commentary, researchers have
proposed that children and adults do not view robots as interactive toys; rather, they see robots as
learning partners that can provide valuable information (Haber & Corriveau, 2023). Based on the
existing literature, we conclude that in infancy, a large range of inanimate objects (e.g., boxes,
geometric figures) that display animate motion patterns trigger the same behaviors observed in
child-adult interactions. With age, the scope of social agents gradually narrows, except in the
case of social robots. Thus, a gradual refinement of what constitutes a sentient agent occurs. Yet,
additional research is needed to better understand what infants and children judge as social
agents and how this ability changes over the lifespan. As exposure to robots and virtual assistants
increases, moving forward, more studies must be done to understand the full impact that regular
interactions with such partners will have on children’s anthropomorphizing.

29

References
Admoni, H., & Scassellati, B. (2017). Social Eye Gaze in human-robot interaction: A Review.
Journal of Human-Robot Interaction, 6(1), 25. https://doi.org/10.5898/jhri.6.1.admoni
Akhtar, N., & Gernsbacher, M. A. (2008). On privileging the role of gaze in infant social
cognition. Child Development Perspectives, 2(2), 59–65. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.17508606.2008.00044.x
Argyle, M., & Cook, M. (1976). Gaze and mutual gaze. Cambridge University Press.
Arterberry, M. E., & Bornstein, M. H. (2002). Infant perceptual and conceptual categorization:
The roles of static and dynamic stimulus attributes. Cognition, 86(1), 1–
24. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-0277(02)00108-7
Aschersleben, G., Hofer, T., & Jovanovic, B. (2008). The link between infant attention to goaldirected action and later theory of mind abilities. Developmental Science, 11(6), 862–868.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00736.x
Backscheider, A. G., Shatz, M., & Gelman, S. A. (1993). Preschoolers' ability to distinguish
living kinds as a function of regrowth. Child Development, 64(4), 1242.
https://doi.org/10.2307/1131337
Baillargeon, R., Scott, R. M., & Bian, L. (2016). Psychological reasoning in infancy. Annual
Review of Psychology, 67, 159–186. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010213115033
Baillargeon, R., Scott, R. M., & He, Z. (2010). False-belief understanding in infants. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 14(3), 110–118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2009.12.006

30

Baker, R. K., Pettigrew, T. L., & Poulin-Dubois, D. (2014). Infants’ ability to associate motion
paths with Object Kinds. Infant Behavior and Development, 37(1), 119–129.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infbeh.2013.12.005
Bardi, L., Regolin, L., & Simion, F. (2010). Biological motion preference in humans at birth:
Role of dynamic and configural properties. Developmental Science, 14(2), 353–359.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00985.x
Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M., & Frith, U. (1985). Does the autistic child have a “theory of
mind” ? Cognition, 21(1), 37–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0277(85)90022-8
Barrett, J. C., Fry, B., Maller, J., & Daly, M. J. (2005). Haploview: Analysis and visualization of
LD and haplotype maps. Bioinformatics, 21(2), 263–265.
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bth457
Baumann, A.-E., Goldman, E. J., Meltzer, A., & Poulin-Dubois, D. (2023). People do not always
know best: Preschoolers’ trust in Social Robots. Journal of Cognition and Development, 1–
28. https://doi.org/10.1080/15248372.2023.2178435
Beier, J. S., & Spelke, E. S. (2012). Infants’ developing understanding of Social Gaze. Child
Development, 83(2), 486–496. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2011.01702.x
Beran, T. N., Ramirez-Serrano, A., Kuzyk, R., Fior, M., & Nugent, S. (2011). Understanding
how children understand robots: Perceived animism in child–robot interaction.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 69(7-8), 539–550.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2011.04.003
Brazelton, T. B., Koslowski, B., & Main, M. (1974). The origins of reciprocity: The early
mother-infant interaction. In M. Lewis & L. A. Rosenblum, The effect of the infant on its
caregiver. Wiley-Interscience.

31

Breazeal, C., Harris, P. L., DeSteno, D., Kory Westlund, J. M., Dickens, L., & Jeong, S. (2016).
Young Children Treat Robots as informants. Topics in Cognitive Science, 8(2), 481–491.
https://doi.org/10.1111/tops.12192
Breil, S. M., Osterholz, S., Nestler, S., & Back, M. D. (2019). Contributions of nonverbal cues to
the accurate judgment of personality traits. The Oxford Handbook of Accurate Personality
Judgment, 193–218. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780190912529.013.13
Brink, K. A., & Wellman, H. M. (2020). Robot teachers for children? Young children trust
robots depending on their perceived accuracy and agency. Developmental Psychology,
56(7), 1268–1277. https://doi.org/10.1037/dev0000884
Broadbent, J. (2017). Comparing online and blended learner's self-regulated learning
strategies and academic performance. The Internet and Higher Education, 33, 24–
32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iheduc.2017.01.004
Brooks, R., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2002). The importance of eyes: How infants interpret adult
looking behavior. Developmental Psychology, 38(6), 958–
966. https://doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.38.6.958
Brooks, R., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2005). The development of gaze following and its relation to
language. Developmental Science, 8(6), 535–543. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.14677687.2005.00445.x
Brugger, A., Lariviere, L. A., Mumme, D. L., & Bushnell, E. W. (2007). Doing the right thing:
Infants' selection of actions to imitate from observed event sequences. Child Development,
78(3), 806–824. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.01034.x
Buiatti, M., Di Giorgio, E., Piazza, M., Polloni, C., Menna, G., Taddei, F., Baldo, E., &
Vallortigara, G. (2019). Cortical route for facelike pattern processing in human newborns.

32

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(10), 4625–4630.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1812419116
Bullock, R. J. (1985). Integrating ideas and interventions. The Journal of Applied Behavioral
Science, 21(3), 347–350. https://doi.org/10.1177/002188638502100313
Burnside, K., Severdija, V., & Poulin‐Dubois, D. (2019). Infants attribute false beliefs to a toy
crane. Developmental Science, 23(2). https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12887
Butler, S. C., Caron, A. J., & Brooks, R. (2000). Infant understanding of the referential
nature of looking. Journal of Cognition and Development, 1(4), 359–
377. https://doi.org/10.1207/S15327647JCD0104_01
Capparini, C., To, M. P. S., & Reid, V. M. (2023). Should I follow your virtual gaze? infants’
gaze following over video call. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 226, 105554.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2022.105554
Caramazza, A., & Shelton, J. R. (1998). Domain-Specific Knowledge Systems in the Brain: The
Animate-Inanimate Distinction. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 10(1), 1–34.
https://doi.org/10.1162/089892998563752
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual Change in Childhood. Mit Press.
Carey, S. (2009). The origin of concepts. Oxford University
Press https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195367638.001.0001
Carpenter, M., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2005). Twelve- and 18-month-olds copy actions in
terms of goals. Developmental Science, 8(1). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.14677687.2004.00385.x
Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Social cognition, joint attention, and
communicative competence from 9 to 15 months of age. Monographs of the

33

Society for Research in Child Development, 63(4), 176.
https://doi.org/10.2307/1166214
Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., Tomasello, M., Butterworth, G., & Moore, C. (1998). Social
Cognition, joint attention, and communicative competence from 9 to 15 months of age.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 63(4), i.
https://doi.org/10.2307/1166214
Clark, H. H., & Fischer, K. (2022). Social Robots as depictions of social agents. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 1–33. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0140525x22000668
Clifford, C. W. G., & Palmer, C. J. (2018). Adaptation to the direction of others’ gaze: A
review. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, Article 2165. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02165
Csibra, G. (2008). Goal attribution to inanimate agents by 6.5-month-old infants. Cognition,
107(2), 705–717. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2007.08.001
Csibra, G., Gergely, G., Bıŕ ó Szilvia, Koós, O., & Brockbank, M. (1999). Goal attribution
without agency cues: The perception of ‘pure reason’ in infancy. Cognition, 72(3), 237–
267. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0010-0277(99)00039-6
Danovitch, J. H., & Alzahabi, R. (2013). Children Show Selective Trust in Technological
Informants. Journal of Cognition and Development, 14(3), 499–513.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15248372.2012.689391
Dasser, V., Ulbaek, I., & Premack, D. (1989). The perception of intention. Science, 243(4889),
365–367. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.2911746
Di Dio, C., Manzi, F., Peretti, G., Cangelosi, A., Harris, P. L., Massaro, D., & Marchetti, A.
(2020). Shall I trust you? from Child–Robot Interaction to trusting relationships. Frontiers
in Psychology, 11. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00469

34

Di Giorgio, E., Loveland, J. L., Mayer, U., Rosa-Salva, O., Versace, E., & Vallortigara, G.
(2017). Filial responses as predisposed and learned preferences: Early attachment in chicks
and babies. Behavioural Brain Research, 325, 90–104.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2016.09.018
Di Giorgio, E., Lunghi, M., Vallortigara, G., & Simion, F. (2021). Newborns’ sensitivity to
speed changes as a building block for animacy perception. Scientific Reports, 11(1).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-79451-3
Dolgin, K. G., & Behrend, D. A. (1984). Children's knowledge about animates and inanimates.
Child Development, 55(4), 1646. https://doi.org/10.2307/1130034
Dunphy-Lelii, S., & Wellman, H. M. (2004). Infants' understanding of occlusion
of others' line-of-sight: Implications for an emerging theory of
mind. European Journal of Developmental Psychology, 1(1), 49–
66. https://doi.org/10.1080/17405620444000049
Eng, A., Chi, Y., & Gray, K. (2023). People treat social robots as real social
agents. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 46, E28.
https//:doi:10.1017/S0140525X22001534
Fantz, R. L. (1963). Pattern vision in newborn infants. Science, 140(Whole No.
3564), 296–297. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.140.3564.296
Frankenhuis, W. E., House, B., Barrett, H. C., & Johnson, S. P. (2013). Infants’ perception of
chasing. Cognition, 126, 224-233.Fouquet, N., Megalakaki, O., & Labrell, F. (2017).
Children's understanding of animal, plant, and artifact properties between 3 and 6
years. Infant and Child Development, 26(6), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1002/icd.2032

35

Gao, T., & Scholl, B. J. (2011). Chasing vs. stalking: Interrupting the perception of animacy.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 37(3), 669–
684. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0020735
Gao, T., Newman, G. E., & Scholl, B. J. (2009). The psychophysics of chasing: A case study in
the perception of animacy. Cognitive Psychology, 59(2), 154–179.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogpsych.2009.03.001
Gelman, R. (1990). First principles organize attention to and learning about relevant data:
Number and the animate-inanimate distinction as examples. Cognitive Science, 14(1), 79–
106. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15516709cog1401_5
Gelman, R., Durgin, F., & Kaufman, L. (1995). Distinguishing between animates and
inanimates: Not by motion alone. In D. Sperber, D. Premack, & A. J. Premack
(Eds.), Causal cognition: A multidisciplinary debate (pp. 150–184). Clarendon
Press/Oxford University Press.
Girouard-Hallam, L. N., & Danovitch, J. H. (2023). Children's interactions with virtual
assistants: Moving beyond depictions of social agents. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 46,
e34.
Goldman, E. J., Baumann, A. E., & Poulin-Dubois, D. (2023a). Preschoolers’
anthropomorphizing of robots: Do human-like properties matter?. Frontiers in
Psychology, 13, 8708. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1102370
Goldman, E.J, Baumann, A.E, & Poulin-Dubois, D. (2023b). Of children and social
robots. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 46, E35.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X22001583

36

Goldman, E. J., Baumann, A. E., Beaudoin, J. & Poulin-Dubois, D. (2023c). Testing children’s
attribution of mental states to robots with the Theory of Mind Scale. [Manuscript in
preparation]. Department of Psychology, Concordia University, Montreal, Canada.
Golinkoff, R., Harding, C., Carlson, V. & Sexton, M. E. The infant’s perception of causal events:
the distinction between animate and inanimate objects. In Advances in Infancy
Research (eds Lipsitt, L. P. & Rovee-Collier, C.) 145–151 (Ablex, New York, 1984).
Gottfried, G. M., & Gelman, S. A. (2005). Developing domain-specific causal-explanatory
frameworks: The role of insides and immanence. Cognitive Development, 20(1), 137–
158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogdev.2004.07.003
Haber, A., & Corriveau, K. H. (2023). Social Robots as Social Learning Partners: Exploring
Children's early understanding and learning from Social Robots. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 46. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0140525x22001601
Hatano, G., Siegler, R. S., Richards, D. Dean., Inagaki, K., Stavy, R., & Wax, N. (1993). The
development of biological knowledge: A multi-national study. Cognitive
Development, 8(1), 47–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/0885-2014(93)90004-o

Harris, P. L., & Corriveau, K. H. (2011). Young Children's Selective Trust in informants.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 366(1567), 1179–
1187. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2010.0321
Heberlein, A. S., & Adolphs, R. (2004). Impaired spontaneous anthropomorphizing despite intact
perception and social knowledge. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
101(19), 7487–7491. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0308220101
Heider, F., & Simmel, M. (1944). An Experimental Study of Apparent Behavior. The American
Journal of Psychology, 57(2), 243. https://doi.org/10.2307/1416950
37

Herrmann, P., Waxman, S. R., & Medin, D. L. (2010). Anthropocentrism is not the first step in
children’s reasoning about the natural world. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 107(22), 9979–9984. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1004440107
Hofer, T., Hauf, P., & Aschersleben, G. (2005). Infant's perception of goal-directed actions
performed by a mechanical device. Infant Behavior and Development, 28(4), 466–480.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infbeh.2005.04.002
Hofrichter, R., Mueller, M. E., & Rutherford, M. D. (2021). Children’s perception of animacy:
Social attributions to moving figures. Perception, 50(5), 387–398.
https://doi.org/10.1177/03010066211010142
Inagaki, K., & Hatano, G. (1993). Young children's understanding of the mind-body
distinction. Child Development, 64(5), 1534–1549. https://doi.org/10.2307/1131551
Inagaki, K., & Hatano, G. (1996). Young children's recognition of commonalities between
animals and plants. Child Development, 67(6), 2823–
2840. https://doi.org/10.2307/1131754
Itakura, S., Okanda, M., & Moriguchi, Y. (2008). Discovering mind: Development of
mentalizing in human children. In S. Itakura & K. Fujita (Eds.), Origins of the social mind:
Evolutionary and developmental views (pp. 179–198). Springer Science + Business
Media. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-4-431-75179-3_9
Jipson, J. L., Gülgöz, S., & Gelman, S. A. (2016). Parent–child conversations regarding the
ontological status of a robotic dog. Cognitive Development, 39, 21–35.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogdev.2016.03.001

38

Johnson, S., Slaughter, V., & Carey, S. (1998). Whose gaze will infants follow? The elicitation
of gaze-following in 12-month-olds. Developmental Science, 1(2), 233–
238. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-7687.00036
Juteau, A.-L., Cossette, I., Millette, M.-P., & Brosseau-Liard, P. (2019). Individual differences in
children’s preference to learn from a confident informant. Frontiers in Psychology, 10.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02006
Kamewari, K., Kato, M., Kanda, T., Ishiguro, H., & Hiraki, K. (2005). Six-and-a-half-month-old
children positively attribute goals to human action and to humanoid-robot motion.
Cognitive Development, 20(2), 303–320. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogdev.2005.04.004
Kanda, T., Hirano, T., Eaton, D., & Ishiguro, H. (2004). Interactive robots as social partners and
peer tutors for children: A field trial. Human-Computer Interaction, 19(1), 61–84.
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327051hci1901&2_4
Kano, F., Krupenye, C., Hirata, S., Tomonaga, M., & Call, J. (2019). Great Apes use selfexperience to anticipate an agent’s action in a false-belief test. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 116(42), 20904–20909. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1910095116
Kennedy, J., Baxter, P., & Belpaeme, T. (2017). Nonverbal immediacy as a
characterisation of social behaviour for human–robot interaction. International
Journal of Social Robotics, 9(1), 109–128. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-0160378-3
Kennedy, J., Baxter, P., Senft, E., & Belpaeme, T. (2015). Social robot tutoring for Child second
language learning. 2016 11th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction (HRI). https://doi.org/10.1109/hri.2016.7451757

39

Kim, M., Yi, S., & Lee, D. (2019). Between living and nonliving: Young children’s animacy
judgments and reasoning about humanoid robots. PLOS ONE, 14(6), e0216869.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0216869

Kline, P. (2000). Handbook of Psychological Testing. London, United Kingdom: Routledge.
Kocher, D., Kushnir, T., & Green, K. E. (2020, June). Better together: young children's
tendencies to help a non-humanoid robot collaborator. In Proceedings of the Interaction
Design and Children Conference (pp. 243-249).
Kominsky, J. F., Shafto, P., & Bonawitz, E. (2021). “There’s something inside”: Children’s
intuitions about animate agents. Plos one, 16(5), e0251081.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0251081
Kory-Westlund, J. M., & Breazeal, C. (2019). A long-term study of young children's rapport,
social emulation, and Language Learning with a peer-like robot playmate in preschool.
Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 6. https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2019.00081
Kory-Westlund, J. M., Jeong, S., Park, H. W., Ronfard, S., Adhikari, A., Harris, P. L., DeSteno,
D., & Breazeal, C. L. (2017). Flat vs. Expressive storytelling: Young children’s learning
and retention of a social robot’s narrative. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 11.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2017.00295
Legerstee, M., Pomerleau, A., Malcuit, G., & Feider, H. (1987). The development of infants'
responses to people and a doll: Implications for research in Communication. Infant
Behavior and Development, 10(1), 81–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/0163-6383(87)90008-7
Leslie, A. M. (1994). Pretending and believing: Issues in the theory of
ToMM. Cognition, 50(1-3), 211–238. https://doi.org/10.1016/00100277(94)90029-9

40

Leslie, A. M., & Keeble, S. (1987). Do six-month-old infants perceive causality? Cognition,
25(3), 265–288. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-0277(87)80006-9
Lorenzi, E., Mayer, U., Rosa-Salva, O., & Vallortigara, G. (2017). Dynamic features of animate
motion activate septal and preoptic areas in visually naïve chicks (Gallus
gallus). Neuroscience, 354, 54-68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2017.04.022
Luo, Y. (2010). Three-month-old infants attribute goals to a non-human agent. Developmental
Science, 14(2), 453–460. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00995.x
Luo, Y., & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Can a self-propelled box have a goal? Psychological Science,
16(8), 601–608. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2005.01582.x
Luo, Y., & Choi, Y. (2013). Infants attribute mental states to nonhuman agents. Social
Perception, 259–282. https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/9780262019279.003.0011
Luo, Y., Kaufman, L., & Baillargeon, R. (2009). Young infants’ reasoning about physical events
involving inert and self-propelled objects. Cognitive Psychology, 58(4), 441–486.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogpsych.2008.11.001

Mandler, J. M. (1992). How to build a baby: II. Conceptual primitives. Psychological Review,
99(4), 587–604. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.99.4.587
Mandler, J. M. (2003). Conceptual categorization. In D. H. Rakison & L. M. Oakes (Eds.), Early
category and concept development: Making sense of the blooming, buzzing confusion (pp.
103–131). Oxford University Press.
Manzi, F., Ishikawa, M., Di Dio, C., Itakura, S., Kanda, T., Ishiguro, H., Massaro, D., &
Marchetti, A. (2022). Infants’ prediction of humanoid robot’s goal-directed action.
International Journal of Social Robotics. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-022-00941-7

41

Manzi, F., Peretti, G., Di Dio, C., Cangelosi, A., Itakura, S., Kanda, T., Ishiguro, H., Massaro,
D., & Marchetti, A. (2020). A robot is not worth another: Exploring children’s mental state
attribution to different humanoid robots. Frontiers in Psychology, 11.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.02011
Marchetti, A., Manzi, F., Itakura, S., & Massaro, D. (2018). Theory of mind and humanoid
robots from a lifespan perspective. Zeitschrift Für Psychologie, 226(2), 98–109.
https://doi.org/10.1027/2151-2604/a000326
Meltzoff, A. N. (1995). Understanding the intentions of others: Re-enactment of intended acts by
18-month-old children. Developmental Psychology, 31(5), 838–
850. https://doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.31.5.838
Meltzoff, A. N., Brooks, R., Shon, A. P., & Rao, R. P. N. (2010). “social” robots are
psychological agents for infants: A test of gaze following. Neural Networks, 23(8-9), 966–
972. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2010.09.005
Moll, H., & Tomasello, M. (2004). 12- and 18-month-old infants follow gaze to spaces
behind barriers. Developmental Science, 7(1), F1–F9.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00315.x
Moore, C., & Povinelli, D. J. (2007). Differences in how 12- and 24-month-olds interpret the
gaze of adults. Infancy, 11(3), 215–231. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.15327078.2007.tb00224.x
Moriguchi, Y., & Hiraki, K. (2011). Longitudinal development of prefrontal function during
early childhood. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 1(2), 153–162.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2010.12.004

42

Mundy, P., Block, J., Delgado, C., Pomares, Y., Van Hecke, A. V., & Parlade, M. V. (2007).
Individual differences and the development of joint attention in infancy. Child
Development, 78(3), 938–954. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.01042.x
O'Connell, L., Poulin-Dubois, D., Demke, T., & Guay, A. (2009). Can infants use a nonhuman
agent's gaze direction to establish word-object relations? Infancy, 14(4), 414–438.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15250000902994073
Ochiai, M. (1989). The role of knowledge in the development of the life concept. Human
Development, 32(2), 72–78. https://doi.org/10.1159/000276365
Okanda, M., Taniguchi, K., Wang, Y., & Itakura, S. (2021). Preschoolers' and adults' animism
tendencies toward a humanoid robot. Computers in Human Behavior, 118, 106688.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2021.106688
Okumura, Y., Kanakogi, Y., Kanda, T., Ishiguro, H., & Itakura, S. (2013a). Infants understand
the referential nature of human gaze but not robot gaze. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 116(1), 86–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2013.02.007
Okumura, Y., Kanakogi, Y., Kanda, T., Ishiguro, H., & Itakura, S. (2013b). The power of human
gaze on Infant Learning. Cognition, 128(2), 127–133.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2013.03.011
Olineck, K. M., & Poulin-Dubois, D. (2005). Infants' Ability to Distinguish Between Intentional
and Accidental Actions and Its Relation to Internal State Language. Infancy, 8(1), 91–
100. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327078in0801_6
Olineck, K. M., & Poulin-Dubois, D. (2009). Infants’ understanding of intention from 10 to 14
months: Interrelations among violation of expectancy and imitation tasks. Infant Behavior
& Development, 32(4), 404–415. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infbeh.2009.06.005

43

Onishi, K. H., & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Do 15-month-old infants understand false beliefs?
Science, 308(5719), 255–258. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1107621
Opfer, J. E. (2002). Identifying living and sentient kinds from dynamic information: The case of
goal-directed versus aimless autonomous movement in Conceptual Change. Cognition,
86(2), 97–122. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0010-0277(02)00171-3
Opfer, J. E., & Gelman, S. A. (2011). Development of the animate-inanimate distinction. In U.
Goswami (Ed.), The Wiley-Blackwell handbook of childhood cognitive development (pp.
213–238). Wiley Blackwell.
Oranç, C., & Küntay, A. C. (2020). Children’s perception of social robots as a source of
information across different domains of knowledge. Cognitive Development, 54, 100875.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogdev.2020.100875
Orgs, G., & Cross, E. (2023). Dancing robots: Social interactions are performed, not
depicted. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 46, E40.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogdev.2020.100875
Pauen, S., & Träuble, B. (2009). How 7-month-olds interpret ambiguous motion events:
Category-based reasoning in infancy. Cognitive Psychology, 59(3), 275–295.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogpsych.2009.06.001
Peretti, G., Manzi, F., Di Dio, C., Cangelosi, A., Harris, P. L., Massaro, D., & Marchetti, A.
(2023). Can a robot lie? Young Children's understanding of intentionality beneath false
statements. Infant and Child Development. https://doi.org/10.1002/icd.2398
Perner, J., Leekam, S. R., & Wimmer, H. (1987). Three-year-olds' difficulty with false belief:
The case for a conceptual deficit. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 5(2), 125–
137. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-835x.1987.tb01048.x

44

Piaget, J. (1929). The child’s conception of the world. London: Kegan Paul, Trench & Trubner.
Poulin-Dubois, D., & Brosseau-Liard, P. (2016). The developmental origins of selective social
learning. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 25(1), 60–
64. https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721415613962
Poulin-Dubois, D., Crivello, C., & Wright, K. (2015). Biological motion primes the
animate/inanimate distinction in infancy. PLOS ONE, 10(2).
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0116910
Poulin-Dubois, D., & Héroux, G. (1994). Movement and children's attributions of life
properties. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 17(2), 329–
347. https://doi.org/10.1177/016502549401700206
Poulin-Dubois, D., Lepage, A., & Ferland, D. (1996). Infants' concept of animacy. Cognitive
Development, 11(1), 19-36. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0885-2014(96)90026-X
Poulin-Dubois, D., & Pauen, S. (2017). The development of object categories. Handbook of
Categorization in Cognitive Science, 653–671. https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-08-1011072.00027-0
Poulin-Dubois, D., & Shultz, T. R. (1990). The infant's concept of agency: The distinction
between social and nonsocial objects. The Journal of Genetic Psychology, 151(1), 77–90.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00221325.1990.9914645
Pratt, T. C., Cullen, F. T., Sellers, C. S., Thomas Winfree, L., Madensen, T. D., Daigle, L. E.,
Fearn, N. E., & Gau, J. M. (2010). The empirical status of Social Learning Theory: A
meta‐analysis. Justice Quarterly, 27(6), 765–802.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07418820903379610
Premack, D. (1990). The infant's theory of self-propelled objects. Cognition, 36(1), 1–

45

16. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0277(90)90051-K
Rakison, D. H., & Poulin-Dubois, D. (2001). Developmental origin of the animate–inanimate
distinction. Psychological Bulletin, 127(2), 209–228. https://doi.org/10.1037/00332909.127.2.209
Richards, D. D., & Siegler, R. S. (1986). Children's understandings of the attributes of
life. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 42(1), 1–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/00220965(86)90013-5
Rochat, P., Morgan, R., & Carpenter, M. (1997). Young infants' sensitivity to movement
information specifying social causality. Cognitive Development, 12(4), 537–561.
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0885-2014(97)90022-8
Rosa-Salva, O., Hernik, M., Broseghini, A., & Vallortigara, G. (2018). Visually-naïve chicks
prefer agents that move as if constrained by a bilateral body-plan. Cognition, 173, 106–
114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.01.004
Rutherford, M. D. & Kuhlmeier, V. A., (2013). Social perception: Detection and interpretation
of animacy, agency, and intention. MIT Press.
Rutherford, M. D., Pennington, B. F., & Rogers, S. J. (2006). The perception of animacy in
young children with autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 36(8), 983–
992. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-006-0136-8
Saxe, R., Tzelnic, T., & Carey, S. (2007). Knowing who Dunnit: Infants identify the causal agent
in an unseen causal interaction. Developmental Psychology, 43(1), 149–158.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.43.1.149
Saylor, M. M., Somanader, M., Levin, D. T., & Kawamura, K. (2010). How do young
children deal with hybrids of living and non-living things: The case of humanoid

46

robots. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 28(4), 835-851.
https://doi.org/10.1348/026151009X481049
Schleihauf, H., Hoehl, S., Tsvetkova, N., König, A., Mombaur, K., & Pauen, S. (2020).
Preschoolers’ motivation to over‐imitate humans and Robots. Child Development, 92(1),
222–238. https://doi.org/10.1111/cdev.13403
Schlottmann, A., & Ray, E. (2010). Goal attribution to schematic animals: Do 6-month-olds
perceive biological motion as animate? Developmental Science, 13(1), 1–
10. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00854.x
Scholl, B. J., & Gao, T. (2013). Perceiving animacy and intentionality: Visual processing or
higher-level judgment? In M. D. Rutherford & V. A. Kuhlmeier (Eds.), Social perception:
Detection and interpretation of animacy, agency, and intention (pp. 197–229). Boston
Review. https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/9780262019279.003.0009
Scholl, B. J., & Tremoulet, P. D. (2000). Perceptual causality and animacy. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 4(8), 299–309. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1364-6613(00)01506-0
Setoh, P., Wu, D., Baillargeon, R., & Gelman, R. (2013). Young infants have biological
expectations about animals. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(40),
15937–15942. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1314075110
Sifre, R., Olson, L., Gillespie, S., Klin, A., Jones, W., & Shultz, S. (2018). A longitudinal
investigation of preferential attention to biological motion in 2- to 24-month-old infants.
Scientific Reports, 8(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-20808-0
Sobel, D. M., & Finiasz, Z. (2020). How children learn from others: An analysis of selective
word learning. Child Development, 91(6). https://doi.org/10.1111/cdev.13415

47

Somanader, M. C., Saylor, M. M., & Levin, D. T. (2011). Remote control and children’s
understanding of robots. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 109(2), 239–
247. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2011.01.005
Southgate, V., Senju, A., & Csibra, G. (2007). Action anticipation through attribution of false
belief by 2-year-olds. Psychological Science, 18(7), 587–592.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01944.x
Spelke, E. S., Phillips, A., & Woodward, A. L. (1995). Infants' knowledge of object motion and
human action. In D. Sperber, D. Premack, & A. J. Premack (Eds.), Causal cognition: A
multidisciplinary debate (pp. 44–78). Clarendon Press/Oxford University Press.
Stower, R., Calvo-Barajas, N., Castellano, G., & Kappas, A. (2021). A meta-analysis on
children’s trust in Social Robots. International Journal of Social Robotics, 13(8), 1979–
2001. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-020-00736-8
Surian, L., & Caldi, S. (2010). Infants' individuation of agents and inert objects. Developmental
Science, 13(1), 143–150. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00873.x
Surian, L., & Franchin, L. (2020). On the domain specificity of the mechanisms underpinning
spontaneous anticipatory looks in false‐belief tasks. Developmental Science, 23(6).
https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12955
Surian, L., & Geraci, A. (2012). Where will the triangle look for it? attributing false beliefs to a
geometric shape at 17 months. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 30(1), 30–44.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-835x.2011.02046.x
Tao, Y. (2016). Young chinese children’s justifications of plants as living things. Early
Education and Development, 27(8), 1159-1174. doi:
http://dx.doi.org.oca.ucsc.edu/10.1080/10409289.2016.1210456

48

Tauzin, T., & Gergely, G. (2018). Communicative mind-reading in preverbal infants. Scientific
Reports, 8(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-27804-4
Tong, Y., Wang, F., Danovitch, J., & Wang, W. (2022). When the internet is wrong: Children’s
trust in an inaccurate internet or human source. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 40(2), 320–333. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjdp.12405
Trauble, B., Pauen, S., & Poulin-Dubois, D. (2004). Speed and direction changes induce the
perception of animacy in 7-month-old infants. Frontiers in Psychology, 5.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01141
Tremoulet, P. D., & Feldman, J. (2000). Perception of animacy from the motion of a single
object. Perception, 29(8), 943–951. https://doi.org/10.1068/p3101
Vogt, P., de Haas, M., de Jong, C., Baxter, P., & Krahmer, E. (2017). Child-robot interactions for
second language tutoring to preschool children. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 11.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2017.00073
Wagner, L., & Carey, S. (2005). 12-month-old infants represent probable endings of motion
events. Infancy, 7(1), 73–83. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327078in0701_6
Wellman, H. M. (2014). Making minds: How theory of mind develops. Oxford University Press.
Wellman, H. M., & Liu, D. (2004). Scaling of theory-of-mind tasks. Child Development, 75(2),
523–541. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2004.00691.x
Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and constraining
function of wrong beliefs in young children's understanding of
deception. Cognition, 13(1), 103–128. https://doi.org/10.1016/00100277(83)90004-5

49

Woodward, A. L. (1998). Infants selectively encode the goal object of an actor's
reach. Cognition, 69(1), 1–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-0277(98)00058-4
Woodward, A. L. (1999). Infants' ability to distinguish between purposeful and non-purposeful
behaviors. Infant Behavior & Development, 22(2), 145–
160. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0163-6383(99)00007-7
Yamaguchi, M., Kuhlmeier, V. A., Wynn, K., & van Marle, K. (2009). Continuity in social
cognition from infancy to childhood. Developmental Science, 12(5), 746–752.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00813.x
Yan, Z. (2006). What influences children's and adolescents' understanding of the complexity of
the Internet? Developmental Psychology, 42(3), 418–428. https://doi.org/10.1037/00121649.42.3.418
Zhang, Y., Song, W., Tan, Z., Wang, Y., Lam, C. M., Hoi, S. P., Xiong, Q., Chen, J., & Yi, L.
(2019). Theory of robot mind: False belief attribution to social robots in children with
and without autism. Frontiers in Psychology, 10.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01732

50

