CASEL’S SEL FRAMEWORK:

What Are the Core Competence Areas
and Where Are They Promoted?
Social and emotional learning (SEL) is
an integral part of education and human
development. SEL is the process through
which all young people and adults acquire
and apply the knowledge, skills, and
attitudes to develop healthy identities,
manage emotions and achieve personal
and collective goals, feel and show
empathy for others, establish and
maintain supportive relationships, and
make responsible and caring decisions.
SEL advances educational equity and
excellence through authentic schoolfamily-community partnerships to
establish learning environments and
experiences that feature trusting and
collaborative relationships, rigorous and
meaningful curriculum and instruction,
and ongoing evaluation. SEL can help
address various forms of inequity and
empower young people and adults to
co-create thriving schools and contribute
to safe, healthy, and just communities.

Learn more: www.casel.org/what-is-SEL

THE CASEL 5:
The CASEL 5
addresses five
broad, interrelated
areas of
competence and
examples for each:

self-awareness,
self-management,
social awareness,
relationship skills,
and responsible
decision-making. The

CASEL 5 can be
taught and applied
at various developmental stages from
childhood to adulthood and across
diverse cultural
contexts to articulate what students
should know and
be able to do for
academic success,
school and civic engagement, health
and wellness, and
fulfilling careers.

www.casel.org/what-is-SEL

SELF-AWARENESS: The abilities to understand one’s own
emotions, thoughts, and values and how they influence
behavior across contexts. This includes capacities to
recognize one’s strengths and limitations with a wellgrounded sense of confidence and purpose. Such as:
• Integrating personal and social identities
• Identifying personal, cultural, and linguistic assets
• Identifying one’s emotions
• Demonstrating honesty and integrity
• Linking feelings, values, and thoughts
• Examining prejudices and biases
• Experiencing self-efficacy
• Having a growth mindset
• Developing interests and a sense of purpose
SOCIAL AWARENESS: The abilities to understand the
perspectives of and empathize with others, including
those from diverse backgrounds, cultures, & contexts.
This includes the capacities to feel compassion for others,
understand broader historical and social norms for behavior in different settings, and recognize family, school, and
community resources and supports. Such as:
• Taking others’ perspectives
• Recognizing strengths in others
• Demonstrating empathy and compassion
• Showing concern for the feelings of others
• Understanding and expressing gratitude
• Identifying diverse social norms, including unjust ones
• Recognizing situational demands and opportunities
• Understanding the influences of organizations/systems
on behavior

SELF-MANAGEMENT: The abilities to manage one’s emotions, thoughts, and behaviors effectively in different situations and to achieve goals and aspirations. This includes
the capacities to delay gratification, manage stress, and
feel motivation & agency to accomplish personal/collective
goals. Such as:
• Managing one’s emotions
• Identifying and using stress-management strategies
• Exhibiting self-discipline and self-motivation
• Setting personal and collective goals
• Using planning and organizational skills
• Showing the courage to take initiative
• Demonstrating personal and collective agency
RELATIONSHIP SKILLS: The abilities to establish and maintain healthy and supportive relationships and to effectively
navigate settings with diverse individuals and groups.This
includes the capacities to communicate clearly, listen actively, cooperate, work collaboratively to problem solve and
negotiate conflict constructively, navigate settings with differing social and cultural demands and opportunities, provide
leadership, and seek or offer help when needed. Such as:
• Communicating effectively
• Developing positive relationships
• Demonstrating cultural competency
• Practicing teamwork and collaborative problem-solving
• Resolving conflicts constructively
• Resisting negative social pressure
• Showing leadership in groups
• Seeking or offering support and help when needed
• Standing up for the rights of others

RESPONSIBLE DECISION-MAKING: The abilities to make caring and constructive choices about personal behavior and
social interactions across diverse situations. This includes the capacities to consider ethical standards and safety concerns, and to evaluate the benefits and consequences of various actions for personal, social, and collective well-being.
Such as:
• Demonstrating curiosity and open-mindedness
• Recognizing how critical thinking skills are useful
• Identifying solutions for personal and social problems
both inside & outside of school
• Learning to make a reasoned judgment after
• Reflecting on one’s role to promote personal, family,
analyzing information, data, facts
and community well-being
• Anticipating and evaluating the consequences of one’s • Evaluating personal, interpersonal, community, and
actions
institutional impacts

THE KEY
SETTINGS:

Our framework takes a systemic approach that emphasizes the importance of establishing equitable learning environments
and coordinating practices across key settings to enhance all students’ social, emotional, and academic learning. We believe
it is most beneficial to integrate SEL throughout the school’s academic curricula and culture, across the broader contexts of
schoolwide practices and policies, and through ongoing collaboration with families and community organizations. These coordinated efforts should foster youth voice, agency, and engagement; establish supportive classroom and school climates and
approaches to discipline; enhance adult SEL competence; and establish authentic family and community partnerships.

CLASSROOMS. Research has shown that social and emotional competence can be enhanced using a variety of clasroombased approaches such as: (a) explicit instruction through which social and emotional skills and attitudes are taught and practiced in developmentally, contextually, and culturally responsive ways; (b) teaching practices such as cooperative learning and
project-based learning; and (c) integration of SEL and academic curriculum such as language arts, math, science, social studies, health, and performing arts. High-quality SEL instruction has four elements represented by the acronym SAFE: Sequenced following a coordinated set of training approaches to foster the development of competencies; Active - emphasizing active forms
of learning to help students practice and master new skills; Focused - implementing curriculum that intentionally emphasizes
the development of SEL competencies; and Explicit - defining and targeting specific skills, attitudes, and knowledge.
SEL instruction is carried out most effectively in nurturing, safe environments characterized by positive, caring relationships
among students and teachers. To facilitate age-appropriate and culturally responsive instruction, adults must understand and
appreciate the unique strengths and needs of each student and support students’ identities. When adults incorporate students’
personal experiences and cultural backgrounds and seek their input, they create an inclusive classroom environment where students are partners in the educational process, elevating their own agency. Strong relationships between adults and students can
facilitate co-learning, foster student and adult growth, and generate collaborative solutions to shared concerns.
SCHOOLS. Effectively integrating SEL schoolwide involves ongoing planning, implementation, evaluation, and continuous improvement by all members of the school community. SEL efforts both contribute to and depend upon a school climate where all
students and adults feel respected, supported, and engaged.
Because the school setting includes many contexts—classrooms, hallways, cafeteria, playground, bus—fostering a healthy
school climate and culture requires active engagement from all adults and students. A strong school culture is rooted in students’ sense of belonging, with evidence that suggests that it plays a crucial role in students’ engagement. SEL also offers an
opportunity to enhance existing systems of student support by integrating SEL goals and practices with universal, targeted, and
intensive academic and behavioral supports. By coordinating and building upon SEL practices and programs, schools can create
an environment that infuses SEL into every part of students’ educational experience and
promotes positive social, emotional, and academic outcomes for all students.
							

Continue to families/caregivers and communities...
www.casel.org/what-is-SEL

THE KEY SETTINGS (CONT.)
FAMILIES/CAREGIVERS. When schools and families form authentic partnerships, they can build strong connections that reinforce
students’ social and emotional development. Families and caregivers are children’s first teachers, and bring deep expertise about
their development, experiences, culture, and learning needs. These insights and perspectives are critical to informing, supporting, and
sustaining SEL efforts. Research suggests that evidence-based SEL programs are more effective when they extend into the home, and
families are far more likely to form partnerships with schools when their schools’ norms, values, and cultural representations reflect
their own experiences. Schools need inclusive decision-making processes that ensure that families—particularly those from historically
marginalized groups—are part of planning, implementing, and continuously improving SEL.
Schools can also create other avenues for family partnership that may include creating ongoing two-way communication with families,
helping caregivers understand child development, helping teachers understand family backgrounds and cultures, providing opportunities for families to volunteer in schools, extending learning activities and discussions into homes, and coordinating family services with
community partners. These efforts should engage families in understanding, experiencing, informing, and supporting the social and
emotional development of their students.
COMMUNITIES. Community partners often provide safe and developmentally rich settings for learning and development,
have deep understanding of community needs and assets, are seen as trusted partners by families and students, and
have connections to additional supports and services that school and families need. Community programs also offer opportunities for
young people to practice their social and emotional skills in settings that are both personally relevant and can open opportunities for
their future. To integrate SEL efforts across the school day and out-of-school time, school staff and community partners should align on
common language and coordinate strategies and communication around SEL-related efforts and initiatives.

Students, families, schools, and communities are all part of broader systems that shape learning, development, and experiences. Inequities based on race, ethnicity, class, language, gender identity, sexual orientation, and other factors are
deeply ingrained in the vast majority of these systems and impact young people and adult social, emotional, and academic
learning. While SEL alone will not solve longstanding and deep-seated inequities in the education system, it can create
the conditions needed for individuals and schools to examine and interrupt inequitable policies and practices, create
more inclusive learning environments, and reveal and nurture the interests and assets of all individuals.

www.casel.org/what-is-SEL

