Journal of Children and Media

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rchm20

How educational are “educational” apps for young
children? App store content analysis using the
Four Pillars of Learning framework
Marisa Meyer, Jennifer M. Zosh, Caroline McLaren, Michael Robb, Harlan
McCaﬀery, Roberta Michnick Golinkoﬀ, Kathy Hirsh-Pasek & Jenny Radesky
To cite this article: Marisa Meyer, Jennifer M. Zosh, Caroline McLaren, Michael Robb, Harlan
McCaﬀery, Roberta Michnick Golinkoﬀ, Kathy Hirsh-Pasek & Jenny Radesky (2021) How
educational are “educational” apps for young children? App store content analysis using
the Four Pillars of Learning framework, Journal of Children and Media, 15:4, 526-548, DOI:
10.1080/17482798.2021.1882516
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/17482798.2021.1882516

View supplementary material

Published online: 23 Feb 2021.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 5616

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 64 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rchm20

JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA
2021, VOL. 15, NO. 4, 526–548
https://doi.org/10.1080/17482798.2021.1882516

How educational are “educational” apps for young children?
App store content analysis using the Four Pillars of Learning
framework
Marisa Meyer a, Jennifer M. Zosh b, Caroline McLarena, Michael Robbc,
Harlan McCafferya, Roberta Michnick Golinkoffd, Kathy Hirsh-Pasek e
and Jenny Radeskya
a
Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA, USA; bDepartment of Human
Development and Family Studies, Penn State University, Brandywine, Media, PA, USA; cCommon Sense
Media, San Francisco, CA, USA; dSchool of Education, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA; eDepartment
of Psychology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA

ABSTRACT

ARTICLE HISTORY

Experts have expressed concerns about the lack of evidence
demonstrating that children’s “educational” applications (apps)
have educational value. This study aimed to operationalize HirshPasek, Zosh, and colleagues' Four Pillars of Learning into a reliable
coding scheme (Pillar 1: Active Learning, Pillar 2: Engagement in the
Learning Process, Pillar 3: Meaningful Learning, Pillar 4: Social
Interaction), describe the educational quality of commercially avail­
able apps, and examine differences in educational quality between
free and paid apps. We analyzed 100 children’s educational apps
with the highest downloads from Google Play and Apple app
stores, as well as 24 apps most frequently played by preschoolage children in a longitudinal cohort study. We developed a coding
scheme in which each app earned a value of 0–3 for each Pillar,
defining lower-quality apps as those scoring ≤4, summed across the
Four Pillars. Overall scores were low across all Pillars. Free apps had
significantly lower Pillar 2 (Engagement in Learning Process) scores
(t-test, p < .0001) and overall scores (t-test, p < .0047) when com­
pared to paid apps, due to the presence of distracting enhance­
ments. These results highlight the need for improved design of
educational apps guided by developmental science.

Received 11 December 2019
Revised 22 January 2021
Accepted 25 January 2021
KEYWORDS

Educational Apps; early
Childhood; digital Play;
mobile Devices; Four Pillars
of Learning; digital Media

Young children are now exposed to technology in a manner unlike any other generation.
Recent estimates illustrate the universality of mobile device access, with approximately
98% of children ages eight and under living in a home with some type of mobile device
(Rideout, 2017). Access to mobile devices is likewise commonplace in lower-income
households, with 96% owning a mobile device (Rideout, 2017). Children ages eight and
under spend an average of over two hours daily using screen media, with a significant
portion of time spent on mobile devices (Rideout, 2017). While many children use mobile
CONTACT Jenny Radesky,
jradesky@med.umich.edu
Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Address:
300 North Ingalls St, 1107, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 Ann Arbor, USA
This article has been republished with minor changes. These changes do not impact the academic content of the article.
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed here.
© 2021 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA

527

devices to stream videos through YouTube or Netflix, mobile applications (“apps”) that
involve gaming or educational instruction are similarly popular.
Apps marketed as “educational” in commercial app stores advertise instruction on
a wide range of fundamental academic skills, including counting, reading, and pattern
recognition. Given the educational categorization of apps in prominent app stores,
parents may expect that their children will develop the advertised early academic skills
through using them. In interviews about their child’s media use, parents often expressed
confidence in their child’s ability to learn from educational apps, possibly “better . . . than
from hands-on toys” (Radesky et al., 2016, p. 505); however, experts worry that these
commercially available apps may not be designed to capitalize on how children learn, and
may not achieve the advertised benefits (Hirsh-Pasek et al., 2015). Nonetheless, children’s
educational apps are extremely popular, with some apps reporting more than
100,000,000 downloads.
Despite increasing use of mobile devices by children, there is limited research assessing
the quality of design features and content presented in commercially available apps.
A recent content analysis of advertising practices in the top-downloaded apps for children
“5 and Under” found that many contained disruptive video advertisements or persuaded
children to watch advertisements in exchange for rewards (Meyer et al., 2019, p. 33), both
of which have the potential to distract young app users from an app’s underlying learning
goals. A review of the top-downloaded, “literacy-focused” apps revealed that the majority
of apps included “testing-based activities,” designed to only accept responses that could
be scored as correct or incorrect; however, “open-ended designs” are similarly important
for providing opportunities for exploratory learning without rigid evaluation (Vaala, Ly, &
Levine, 2015, p. 5, 27). Furthermore, Callaghan and Reich (2018) conducted a content
analysis of math and literacy apps marketed to preschoolers and determined that many
evidence-based strategies for teaching preschool-age children were not utilized; they also
found that app design features failed to match normative developmental capabilities for
preschool-age users. Notably, there was a lack of scaffolded challenges in app activities, as
well as frequent feedback mechanisms that may “undermine users’ intrinsic motivation”
(Callaghan & Reich, 2018, p. 289).
Some studies suggest that preschool-age children can learn specific skills and concepts
through interactive apps, such as problem-solving skills (e.g., Tower of Hanoi puzzles,
Huber et al., 2014), foundational mathematics skills (Outhwaite, Faulder, Gulliford, &
Pitchford, 2019), and vocabulary (Chiong & Shuler, 2010). However, the apps that have
undergone empirical testing and evaluation – such as those from PBS KIDS and university
research teams – may differ fundamentally from those promoted in app stores. There
have been no comprehensive reviews of the educational quality of children’s apps
marketed with a variety of educational objectives. Such a review is needed to help parents
and early childhood practitioners be informed consumers, particularly since many chil­
dren’s apps appear to have been designed as vehicles for advertising revenue (Meyer
et al., 2019) or data trackers (Binns et al., 2018).
Additionally, it is unclear whether paid apps differ in quality from apps that can be
downloaded for free. Higher-income parents (29%) report more frequently purchasing
apps for their child compared to lower-income parents (14%) (Rideout, 2017). Moreover,
lower-income parents have expressed more confidence in the educational value of these
commercially available apps (Radesky et al., 2016). Access to high-quality educational

528

M. MEYER ET AL.

television programming is associated with cognitive and behavioral benefits for lowerincome children (Christakis et al., 2013; Linebarger, Barr, Lapierre, & Piotrowski, 2014), and
it is possible that free high-quality educational apps could provide similar benefits.
However, if free educational apps are lower quality than those requiring payment, this
may exacerbate the digital quality divide. Further research is needed to determine
whether differences exist between the quality of free and paid apps (Callaghan & Reich,
2018).
The first aim of this study was to create a coding scheme based on the “Four Pillars,”
introduced by Hirsh-Pasek, Zosh, and colleagues (2015) as a framework for evaluating
app quality. The Four Pillars comprise interrelated aspects of design that can support or
inhibit child learning. Pillar 1 (Active Learning) examines whether an app is “minds-on,”
requiring thinking and intellectual effort, rather than simply engaging in cause-andeffect interactions with the app (p. 8). Pillar 2 (Engagement in the Learning Process)
assesses the interactive enhancements of an app. It evaluates whether these features
serve to engage the user in app activities versus distract the user, as occurs with
interactive hotspots, excessive visual or sound effects, or disruptive advertisements.
Pillar 3 (Meaningful Learning) examines whether the content of the app is meaningful
to children’s everyday experiences and is taught in a manner that can be contextua­
lized within existing knowledge. Pillar 4 (Social Interaction) assesses the degree to
which children can interact meaningfully with characters through the app interface
or with caregivers around the app. This pioneering framework has not been operatio­
nalized into a coding scheme to evaluate apps marketed as “educational” to children.
Thus, we aimed to create a coding scheme rooted in these ideal standards for learning,
which may help inform both the design of apps that truly facilitate optimal learning, as
well as parents’ expectations for children’s learning from commercially available
products.
Our second aim was to systematically evaluate the content and design presented in the
top-downloaded educational apps in the Google Play and Apple app stores, and the most
commonly played educational apps in an ongoing cohort study of preschool-age chil­
dren. Our final aim was to evaluate differences in educational quality between free and
paid apps. Given low-quality content found in prior analyses (Callaghan & Reich, 2018;
Vaala et al., 2015), we hypothesized that many apps would receive low scores on each of
the Four Pillars, particularly free apps, which contain more advertisements (Meyer et al.,
2019).

Method
Overall study design
We conducted a content analysis of 124 apps marketed as educational to children from
three sources: the top-downloaded educational apps from the Google Play store; the
highest ranked educational apps from the Apple app store; and the apps most frequently
used by preschool-age children collected in a longitudinal study assessing child devel­
opment and mobile device use. The University of Michigan Medical School Institutional
Review Board approved the aforementioned study, and deemed the content analysis
exempt from human subjects review.

JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA

529

Developing the four pillars coding scheme
To create a reliable coding scheme based on the Four Pillars framework, we drafted an
initial coding scheme based on the Hirsh-Pasek et al. (2015) article, and applied it to apps
marketed to young children that we downloaded for a previous study (Meyer et al., 2019).
The initial coding scheme was iteratively refined by the research team (MM, JR) by
applying it to varied sets of children’s apps and meeting to discuss coding uncertainties.
For example, because the first coding set yielded consistently low scores, we then coded
presumably higher-quality apps from Common Sense Media recommendation lists.
Common Sense Media is an independent non-profit that reviews media for youth ages
2–18. Due to significant inter-app variability in each of the Pillars, we decided that the
coding scheme would have ordinal codes (0–3) to represent a range of design qualities.
Subsequent discussions with the Four Pillars authors (KHP, JZ, MR, RG) were conducted to
refine the coding scheme and achieve consensus about difficult-to-code concepts, such
as the “meaningfulness” of learning (Pillar 3). To improve external validity, collaborative
meetings were held between co-authors from different disciplines (i.e., Pediatrics and
Developmental Psychology), ensuring the same conceptual understanding of the coding
scheme from multiple disciplinary perspectives. The final coding scheme is shown in
Appendix A. A final set of reliability testing with both Android and Apple apps demon­
strated overall high reliability (Pillar 1 ICC = .869; Pillar 2 ICC = .947; Pillar 3 ICC = .657; Pillar
4 ICC = .758).

Identifying apps to code
We chose to review the top apps in the “education” sections of the Google Play and Apple
app stores to replicate the experience of consumers seeking educational apps, thereby
maximizing ecological validity. Although Hirsh-Pasek et al. (2015) assert that only apps
that “support a learning goal” should be considered educational, they emphasize that app
stores contain many apps marketed as educational that do not have clear learning goals
(p. 4); we included these in our analytic sample.
Between November 26–29, 2018, we selected 50 apps from the Google Play store: 25
apps with the highest downloads (5,000,000–100,000,000+) from the “Top Free in
Education” subcategory of the “Family” section, and 25 apps with the highest downloads
(10,000–500,000+) from the “Top Paid in Education” subcategory. Paid apps ranged in
price from $0.99–$4.99. To select apps, we ranked them based on number of downloads; if
more than one app had the same range of downloads than needed to fill our app quota,
we selected based on order displayed in the store. Apps were excluded from analysis if
they were: an older version of another app on the list (e.g., Farming Simulator 16 and
Farming Simulator 18), platforms for multiple activities requiring credit card information
(e.g., ABCMouse), or not intended for at-home use (e.g., ClassDojo).
We selected 50 apps from Apple’s app store between March 22–2 April 2019, but used
a slightly different selection strategy because this app store does not display the number
of app downloads. Instead, we selected 25 apps from the “Top Free” subcategory of the
“Education” section and 25 apps from the “Top Paid” subcategory, based on their ranking
in each subcategory. Paid apps ranged in price from $0.99–$8.99. Similar to the Google
Play selection process, apps that were classroom communication tools or not intended for

530

M. MEYER ET AL.

at-home use (e.g., Google Classroom), and large platforms containing multiple educational
games without free trials (e.g., IXL) were excluded from this analysis. Additionally, 13 apps
that were already selected from the Google Play store were not selected for the Apple list
(e.g., Peekaboo Barn). Because 18 of the top 25 paid apps were by the same developer,
Toca Boca, we decided to only code the top five of these apps to allow more variability in
the sample; we wanted to describe a greater range of the design features that children are
encountering when using popular educational apps. We chose not to compare educa­
tional quality scores between Google Play and Apple samples because of these differ­
ences in selection procedure.

App collection from longitudinal study
To describe the educational quality of apps actually played by young children – rather
than those advertised or ranked highly in app stores – we selected a sample of the most
frequently played apps in the first wave of data collection of the Preschooler Tablet Study
(NICHD R21HD094051), which is described in greater detail elsewhere (Radesky et al.,
2020). In this study, one week of mobile device sampling occurs through a passive sensing
app for children with Android devices, and battery screenshot collection for Apple
devices. Data from each source were analyzed to yield the 24 most commonly played
Android and Apple educational apps. Through incorporating these apps, we aimed to
further increase the ecological validity of our sample.

Data analysis
After reaching reliability on a subsample of apps, two researchers played each app for
approximately 20 minutes and independently assigned a value of 0–3 for each Pillar,
whereby 0 represents the lowest score and 3 represents the highest score. Researchers
also recorded rationales for each score, describing how their observations from gameplay
corresponded with a Pillar’s criteria to support their given score. Uncertainties in coding
were resolved by consensus. We then calculated the means and frequencies of each Pillar
score. We summed the Four Pillar scores for each app to calculate an overall educational
quality score, and categorized apps as lower-quality if they earned a total score of ≤4. For
all Pillars, a score of 0 or 1 reflected design features that detracted from the app’s intended
educational objective, whereas a score of 2 or 3 reflected design features that enhanced
the app’s intended educational objective. Thus, a score of 4 was chosen as the cutoff in
determining an app’s overall educational quality because it would indicate an app scored
≤1 on most of the Pillars. We then conducted bivariate analyses examining the frequency
of Pillar scores by app payment status (free versus paid) using t-tests and Chi-square tests
of association; we used Spearman’s correlation to determine inter-pillar correlations.

Results
Operationalizing the four pillars: coding scheme description
Pillar 1 (Active Learning - see Table Appendix A) is guided by whether the app activities
involve the child generating responses and ideas, versus simply reacting to on-screen

JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA

531

stimuli. This Pillar assesses whether the child will be cognitively challenged by the app
activities, or whether the app includes only simple cause-and-effect design. A score of 0
indicates that activities could be completed with little mental effort, such as Learning
Letters Puppy, which involves tapping the screen to see and hear a narrated alphabet or
number line; design constraints include inability to go backwards or have letters repeated
[Supplemental Material 1]. Other examples of a “0” code include bubble popping games,
which do not require more mental effort than a simple reaction to engage with the app
activities. Conversely, apps would score a 3 if the activities require the player to generate
responses with incrementally more challenge, thereby eliciting “minds-on” learning
(Hirsh-Pasek et al., 2015, p. 8). Lego DUPLO Town requires the player to independently
generate responses to design aspects of their virtual buildings, rather than following
instructions. Flexible challenges are provided. For example, if a building piece is placed
outside of bounds, it will not snap into the closest spot; instead, it will return to the pieces
bank, and the player must figure out why their construction did not work as intended
[Supplemental Material 2]. An app would score a 1 if the activities presented a learning
objective in a constrained format (e.g., completing a simple puzzle), whereas an app
would score a 2 if the learning objectives were presented with a greater degree of
flexibility, yet still included programmed instructions that guided overall gameplay.
Pillar 2 (Engagement in the Learning Process - see Table Appendix A) questions
whether the interactive and gamified qualities of the app support engagement with the
app’s learning objectives, or potentially distract the user. This Pillar assesses the preva­
lence, quantity, and distractibility of advertising, hotspot enhancements, and rewards that
could themselves become the focus of gameplay. An app would earn a score of 0 if there
were four or more types of disruptive advertisements, video advertisements were
embedded in gameplay, a pop-up advertisement interrupted mid-gameplay, or the player
was rewarded with tokens for every action. For example, in Baby Panda Home Safety, popup advertisements frequently interrupted the user’s actions mid-gameplay. We chose to
assign low Pillar 2 (Engagement in the Learning Process) scores to apps with highly
prevalent advertising because extant research maintains that too many distractions in
educational material are negatively associated with children’s learning outcomes, likely
due to overwhelming a child’s cognitive load and inhibiting their ability to process the
instructed concepts (Barr, Shuck, Salerno, Atkinson, & Linebarger, 2010; Tare, Chiong,
Ganea, & Deloache, 2010).
Pillar 2 (Engagement in the Learning Process) scores were further determined by the
quantity of relevant feedback provided to the user, defined as corrective or formative
responses contingent to the child’s actions (e.g., explaining why their answer was incor­
rect; see Falloon, 2013). Apps scored lower if they provided either nonspecific feedback
(e.g., sound and visual effects) to user actions, or displayed excessive rewards (e.g., stars
covering the screen) not relevant to the learning goals. For example, in Sweet Baby Girl
Daycare, the player earns coins and stars after each step in a simple cooking activity; the
player observes the tokens fly across the screen to their progress trackers and hears
a “cha-ching” noise [Supplemental Material 3]. Conversely, an app would score a 3 if no
advertising was present, or if enhancements were designed in a manner that supported
the learning goals. For example, in Toca Lab: Elements, the characters make facial expres­
sions and noises in reaction to the lab equipment used to transform them into new
elements, thereby embellishing the open-ended play experience of the app. An app

532

M. MEYER ET AL.

would score a 1 if one-to-three types of advertisements were present that interrupted the
child’s activities, or if excessive rewards were present. For example, Monkey Preschool Fix-It
scored a 1 for Pillar 2 (Engagement in the Learning Process) because excessive, irrelevant
enhancements occurred after every action. Specifically, the monkey would smile, jump,
and/or squeal after correct answers, and shake its head, wave its hands, and/or make
a noise after an incorrect response [Supplemental Material 4]. Additionally, the player
would hear a narrated affirmation after correctly completing each activity, frequently
followed by a sparkly, rainbow trail around correct responses, or earning virtual toys after
completing activities. In contrast, Bedtime Math earned a score of 3 for Pillar 2
(Engagement in the Learning Process) because relevant feedback was provided after
the player answered a level’s question; the correct answer slides across the screen while
a slide-whistle noise plays, but no other hotspots or rewards are provided [Supplemental
Material 5].
Pillar 3 (Meaningful Learning - see Table Appendix A) assesses whether the presenta­
tion of the educational curriculum promotes transfer of meaningful information or
instructed skills to the child’s life context. An app would score 0 if the activities had no
clear learning objective or were not relevant to the child’s life experiences. For example,
Baby Phone prompted simple tapping on number and animal buttons to hear piano
sounds or nursery songs [Supplemental Material 6]. There was no connection between
the app’s activities, visual effects, and sound effects to corresponding concepts in real life.
Notably, if the player tapped on the call button, the screen would switch to a cartoon
picture that moves side-to-side while a song plays, rather than demonstrating how
a phone is used. For an app to score a 3, the activities should be based on learning
experiences that would be easy for the child to replicate in real life, with gameplay
strongly connected and relevant to the child’s life. Little Panda Travel Safety teaches
strategies for staying safe while away from home, demonstrating and narrating how the
player can use the instructed skills (i.e., “whenever you go out, you must stay within your
parent’s sight”). The activities in this app are based on experiences that are not only
relevant to a preschooler’s life, but are presented in such a way that prompts the child to
use them in real-life experiences. Relevance to children’s lives had been interpreted as
content that would be taught in preschool programs or would be beneficial for
a preschool-age child to know, such as foundational skills like numeracy and phonics.
Moreover, opportunities for pretend play, creative expression, and strategic problemsolving were likewise interpreted as relevant to a child’s life. An app would score a 1 if the
activities involved a meaningful concept for children (e.g., color recognition), but only
provided a constrained set of activities to learn these concepts. An example of these
gameplay constraints includes repeatedly sliding colored blocks into holes outlined in the
corresponding colors, while hearing the color names narrated. Apps would score a 2 if
they provide multiple ways to contextualize a learning concept. For example, an app may
show how a letter fits into several different words and defines those words through
animations, but does not teach or prompt the child to apply that knowledge to real life.
Pillar 4 (Social Interaction - see Table Appendix A) evaluates the level of social inter­
activity promoted in gameplay. Social interactions may occur through co-playing with
another person, or through development of parasocial relationships with characters.
Parasocial relationships are one-sided, emotionally charged connections an individual
forms with a media character which have been found to improve children’s learning from

JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA

533

media (Bond & Calvert, 2014). If an app included no prompts to co-play and had no
characters with which children could develop parasocial relationships, it scored 0 (e.g.,
Drawing for Kids and Toddlers). An app earned a 3 if it provided explicit opportunities for
social engagement around the app and presented ideas for how to transfer the instructed
concepts to the real world with another person (e.g., “Pinkamazing Family Game” of PBS
KIDS Games). If an app’s structure provided opportunities for development of weak
parasocial relationships with app characters or had excessive, gamified features distract­
ing from socially interactive features, it scored a 1. The characters of Dentist Games for Kids
smiled when the player finished cleaning their teeth, but did not comment or act in
a manner suggesting that the character understood the player’s actions [Supplemental
Material 7]. An app earned a 2 if it provided opportunities for social interaction with
another person, such as through multi-touch input in an activity. An app also earned a 2 if
it provided opportunities for development of high-quality parasocial relationships with
app characters, such as when a character responds to the child’s actions in ways that show
they understand the child. For example, in XtraMath the teacher reacted in a way that
made it seems as though he understood the player’s actions through how he discussed
the player’s quiz results. See Appendix A for the summarized coding scheme.

Evaluation of the content and design of apps: descriptive statistics
Scores for Pillars 1–3 ranged from 0 to 3, spanning the entire quality spectrum assessed by
the coding scheme. Pillar 4 (Social Interaction) scores only ranged from 0 to 2, for both
free and paid apps (Figure 1).
A score of 1 was the most frequent score earned by apps for Pillar 1 (Active Learning),
regardless of free versus paid distinction. Eighty-one of 124 apps (65%) scored a 1,

Figure 1. Frequency of codes for the four pillars.

534

M. MEYER ET AL.

indicating widespread structural constraints and a low degree of cognitive effort pro­
moted by the apps in our sample. Ten additional apps (8%) scored a 0, leading to 91 apps
(73%) demonstrating lower-quality design as assessed by Pillar 1 (Active Learning) criteria.
Likewise, a score of 1 was the most frequent score earned for Pillar 2 (Engagement in the
Learning Process), with 78 apps (63%) earning this score. Sixteen apps (13%) also earned
a 0, resulting in 94 apps (76%) presenting lower-quality interactive design; this suggests
disruptive advertising and excessive feedback mechanisms were prominent throughout
sampled apps, with the potential to distract users from gameplay. A score of 1 was the
most frequent score earned for Pillar 3 (Meaningful Learning; 74 apps, 60%), with an
additional five apps (4%) scoring a 0. Seventy-nine apps (64%) earning lower-quality
scores for Pillar 3 (Meaningful Learning) suggests that the designs of sampled apps did
not promote meaningful learning in a digital setting, nor support users in transferring
learned skills to another setting. Sixty-two apps (50%) earned a score of 1 for Pillar 4
(Social Interaction), followed by 46 apps (37%) scoring a 0; the frequency of these lowerquality scores suggests that 87% of apps in our sample failed to promote opportunities for
social interaction. Figure 1 illustrates the frequency of scores for each Pillar. Of 124 apps
sampled, 72 (58%) earned a total score of ≤4, thereby considered lower-quality.

Quality differences based on payment
Table 1 provides means and standard deviations for each Pillar based on app payment
status. Low mean scores were observed across all Pillars. Pillar 2 (Engagement in the
Learning Process) scores were significantly lower in free apps compared to paid apps (t
(122) = 3.97, p < .0001), as were overall scores (t(122) = 2.88, p < .0047). Additionally, more
free apps (47 apps, 64%) were considered lower-quality than paid apps (25 apps, 50%),
although differences were not statistically significant (χ2(1, N = 124) = 2.24, p = .14).

Inter-pillar correlations
Pillar 1 (Active Learning), Pillar 2 (Engagement in the Learning Process), and Pillar 3
(Meaningful Learning) were significantly associated with each other; however, Pillar 4
(Social Interaction) was not significantly associated with the other Pillars. Specifically, Pillar
1 (Active Learning) was moderately correlated with Pillar 2 (Engagement in the Learning
Process) (rs = .36, p < .0001, N = 124) and Pillar 3 (Meaningful Learning) (rs = .55, p < .0001,
N = 124). Pillar 2 (Engagement in the Learning Process) was significantly correlated with
Pillar 3 (Meaningful Learning), albeit to a smaller degree (rs = .26, p = .0035, N = 124).
Table 1. Mean 6pillar scores by payment status.
Pillar
Pillar 1 – Active Learning
Pillar 2 – Engagement in the Learning Process
Pillar 3 – Meaningful Learning
Pillar 4 – Social Interaction
Total Score
* p < .0001, ** p < .0047

Free Apps
Mean (SD)
1.18 (0.63)
1.05 (0.77)*
1.35 (0.71)
0.73 (0.67)
4.31 (1.69)**

Paid Apps
Mean (SD)
1.38 (0.81)
1.70 (1.04)*
1.44 (0.61)
0.80 (0.67)
5.32 (2.21)**

JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA

535

Discussion
In this study, our primary objective was to assess the educational quality of commercially
available children’s apps based on the Four Pillars framework (Hirsh-Pasek et al., 2015). To
accomplish this goal, we created a detailed coding scheme based on established princi­
ples for facilitating learning in early childhood.
Overall, we found that most of the top-downloaded children’s educational apps from
Google Play, Apple, and our sampled cohort’s selection scored in the lower range of Four
Pillars principles, regardless of payment status. However, free apps contained more
distracting visual and sound effects, disruptive advertising, and irrelevant rewards than
paid apps, as illustrated by lower Pillar 2 (Engagement in the Learning Process) scores;
these features may distract from other educational objectives. Furthermore, even in paid
apps, which parents may assume are higher-quality, 50% of our sample scored in the
lower-quality range (≤4). Seven apps (6%) earned a total score greater than 8, suggestive
of a higher-quality educational experience in the app. The highest total score earned was
a 10, of which two paid apps (Daniel Tiger’s Stop & Go Potty and My Food–Nutrition for Kids)
earned.
This study contributes to the limited research on children’s educational apps. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first study assessing the quality of content and design
features in the top-downloaded educational apps from Google Play and Apple, as well as
apps actually played by preschool-age children. It is likewise one of few studies examining
quality differences between free and paid educational apps (Callaghan & Reich, 2018).
Prior research has primarily focused on the curricular content of apps for only a single
domain, such as literacy or math skills. Nonetheless, in accordance with prior content
analyses, we found high levels of advertising (Meyer et al., 2019) and distracting, tangen­
tial animations (Vaala et al., 2015), as evidenced by lower Pillar 2 (Engagement in the
Learning Process) scores. Moreover, lower Pillar 4 (Social Interaction) scores highlight the
few embedded opportunities for in-person or mediated social interaction in popular
educational apps; Vaala et al. (2015) revealed a comparable dearth of apps “designed to
promote joint media engagement” (p. 6). Research examining parent–child interactions
around tablets has similarly highlighted limitations in parent–child reciprocity when apps
have more enhancements or fast-paced design (Hiniker, Lee, Kientz, & Radesky, 2018;
Munzer, Miller, Weeks, Kaciroti, & Radesky, 2019).
Inter-pillar correlations were small to moderate among Pillar 1 (Active Learning), Pillar 2
(Engagement in the Learning Process), and Pillar 3 (Meaningful Learning); however, Pillar
4 (Social Interaction) was not significantly associated with the other Pillars. These findings
suggest that high-quality, well-designed apps are more likely to be well designed along
multiple design facets. For example, an app that promoted greater “minds-on” thinking
(Hirsh-Pasek et al., 2015, p. 8) also likely had more formative feedback and fewer dis­
ruptive advertisements, scoring higher on both Pillar 1 (Active Learning) and Pillar 2
(Engagement in the Learning Process). Lack of significant correlations between Pillar 4
(Social Interaction) and the other Pillars likely reflects the rarity of structured opportunities
for social interaction in currently available commercial apps.

536

M. MEYER ET AL.

Challenges in operationalizing and implementing the coding scheme
While developing the Four Pillars coding scheme, we encountered challenges with
applying this theoretical framework to actual app experiences and achieving consistent
observations between different devices; these challenges hold relevance for other
research teams considering app content analysis.

Pillar 2 (engagement in the learning process) – changing advertisement patterns
Time of day, date of gameplay, and duration of gameplay were not held constant when
coding apps; thus variability emerged in the quantity and types of advertising each
researcher observed. Variability in advertising practices was primarily observed among the
disruptive advertising criteria that characterized the lower-quality scores of 0 and 1, such as
the presence of pop-up video advertisements and rating prompts. For example, one
researcher might experience a pop-up video advertisement after exiting an activity, while
another researcher experienced a pop-up advertisement interrupting gameplay because
they remained in an activity longer than the first researcher. These inconsistencies may be
due to differences in how advertising networks populate advertisements. However, given the
high reliability for Pillar 2 (Engagement in the Learning Process), we suspect that variability in
advertising did not significantly distort the consistency of sampled gameplay experiences.
Pillar 2 (engagement in the learning process) – emphasis on distractions versus
feedback quality
We intended for Pillar 2 (Engagement in the Learning Process) criteria to evaluate the extent
to which interactive features support or distract the user from engaging with an app’s
learning objectives. Although prior studies have detailed the differences between quality
and contingency of digital scaffolds (Callaghan & Reich, 2018), we found that the sheer
quantity of advertising and enhancements in sampled apps precluded a close examination
of digital scaffold quality. We judged that distracting advertisements, tokens, virtual toys,
and other irrelevant design approaches would invoke children’s extraneous processing, in
which these tangential design features tax working memory capacity and strain a child’s
cognitive capacity for learning new information (Mayer, 2014). Moreover, prior research
emphasizes the importance of the visual environment for learning and children’s abilities to
both selectively attend to and sustain attention on tasks. For example, kindergarteners in
classrooms with many colorful decorations have greater difficulty focusing on instructed
tasks than those in classrooms without decorations (Fisher, Godwin, & Seltman, 2014), and
preschoolers perform worse on tasks when distractions are continuously presented
(Kannass & Colombo, 2007); the same may apply to distracting digital environments.
We also considered the extent to which excessive enhancements and rewards for user
actions might undermine an app’s learning objectives. Although feedback coupled with
extrinsic rewards are helpful when relevant to the desired behavior (e.g., “natural
rewards”), irrelevant rewards (e.g., virtual toys for completing math equations) and
excessive enhancements (e.g., multiple forms of praise immediately after any user action)
have been hypothesized to accustom children to extrinsic motivation, rather than
develop intrinsic motivation to complete tasks (Hirsh-Pasek et al., 2015). More research
is needed to understand the balance of digital enhancements and rewards in supporting
versus distracting from child learning.

JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA

537

Pillar 3 – what constitutes “meaningful learning?”
Throughout the process of developing the coding scheme, defining the concepts
involved in Pillar 3 (Meaningful Learning) posed the greatest challenge. For example,
are simple concepts (e.g., counting) more meaningful to app users at earlier develop­
mental stages than to more mature app users? Are apps that provide “pretend play
experiences,” such as a hair salon or hospital, only meaningful if they allow significant
autonomy and imagination for the child?
The value derived from rote learning differs by child and academic subject, which was
difficult to capture in this coding scheme. Rote learning can lead to memorization of
foundational concepts and facts, but deeper conceptual understanding of instructed mate­
rial improves retention of concepts and facilitates transfer to other contexts or tasks
(Committee on Developments in the Science of Learning, 2000). Thus, our coding scheme
emphasized the extent to which an app provides these meaningful learning opportunities,
including instruction of concepts in multiple contexts rather than via a single example
(Committee on Developments in the Science of Learning, 2000), or encouraging a child to
apply new information to their everyday experiences (Hirsh-Pasek et al., 2015; Vosniadou,
2001). For instance, an app intended to teach the alphabet would promote deeper con­
ceptual understanding of a given letter through repeating the letter sound, tracing the letter,
and showcasing pictures and the corresponding spelling of words that start with the letter.
Pillar 4 (social interaction) – assessing the quality of parasocial relationships
When developing measures of social interactivity, we not only considered the possibility
of social engagement with other players in-person around the device or mediated by the
device, but also considered the possibility of social engagement with app characters via
parasocial relationships. We struggled to judge the degrees of quality for parasocial
relationships, as the mere presence of an app character standing adjacent to an activity
(e.g., a cartoon lion in ABC Kids–Tracing and Phonics that stands next to the to-be-traced
letter and looks around while waiting for the player to trace the letter) differs from an app
character that “talks” to the player through programmed responses to the player’s actions.
Additionally, prior relationships with branded characters, such as Elmo and the Super
Why! characters, may influence the player’s engagement with the character, compared to
a novel character created for a specific app. We decided to include both degree of
contingent interactivity and familiarity of characters when assessing the quality of para­
social relationships in our coding scheme. For example, Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: HalfShell Heroes includes popular media characters with whom preschool-age children are
likely familiar, but they provide only generic, affirmative feedback to the player’s actions,
yielding a lower Pillar 4 score. Conversely, in Daniel Tiger’s Stop & Go Potty, the well-known
character Daniel Tiger expresses greater understanding of the player’s actions through
tailored feedback, leading to development of a stronger parasocial relationship.
Finding a balance in the level of detail involved in coding
A primary challenge in developing and using the present coding scheme involved its high
level of detail. Our coding scheme’s range of 0–3 was intended to prevent oversight of
important details that would distinguish higher-quality apps from lower-quality apps, but
the nuances in the coding scheme led to more time needed to achieve inter-rater
reliability. Compared to television research – in which educational content coding is

538

M. MEYER ET AL.

performed on a limited number of children’s programs viewed by multiple participants –
the sheer number of different children’s apps is much higher; coding hundreds of apps
would not be feasible when the coding process takes 20 minutes per app.
Future research teams may consider using binary 0/1 coding for simpler implementa­
tion. Moreover, a dichotomous coding scheme may be easier to reliably train multiple labs
to use. In posthoc analyses, we condensed the four-tier coding scheme into a binary
coding scheme (scores of 0 and 1 collapsed to a score of 0 to indicate lower-quality, and
scores of 2 and 3 collapsed to a score of 1 to indicate higher-quality). With this dichot­
omous coding scheme, results were similar in terms of overall app quality (scores of 0
occurred in 73% of Pillar 1, 76% of Pillar 2, 64% of Pillar 3, and 87% of Pillar 4) and
comparisons between free and paid apps.

Implications of quality differences based on payment
App quality differences based on payment status were observed for both Pillar 2
(Engagement in the Learning Process) and overall scores, whereby free apps earned
lower scores than paid apps. As aforementioned, the driving factor of lower Pillar 2
(Engagement in the Learning Process) scores was the high prevalence of disruptive
advertisements and frequent, reward-driven feedback; these design features may inhibit
a child’s ability to attend to and comprehend an app’s educational content. If free apps
are more frequently played by children of lower-socioeconomic status (SES), the lowerquality design we documented among free apps may serve to widen the present digital
divide. Moreover, if children of lower-SES are using free educational apps for supple­
mental or preparatory learning experiences for grade school, the intended gains in early
academic skills and subject matter may not be realized, given the disconnect between the
design of popular educational apps and the features most conducive to children’s
learning.
Importantly, some apps are free because the developer incorporates in-app purchases
and advertisements, whereas other apps are free because they are created by non-profit
organizations. This distinction in business models may obscure quality differences for
Pillar 2 (Engagement in the Learning Process) based solely on payment status. Within our
sample, PBS KIDS apps were the only free apps developed by non-profits. In post hoc
analyses, PBS KIDS apps (n = 3) received higher scores than free apps (n = 72) for almost all
Pillars (Pillar 1: PBS M = 1.00, Free M = 1.19; Pillar 2: PBS M = 1.67, Free M = 1.06; Pillar 3: PBS
M = 2.33, Free M = 1.33; Pillar 4: PBS M = 2.00, Free M = 0.69). However, the small sample
size precludes inferential statistical analyses.

Additional implications for research
Despite the time required to code an app using a theory-based coding scheme, the
evaluation of the quality of children’s educational apps is necessary to establish greater
understanding of the quality of interactive and mobile media played by children. The
developmental benefits associated with high-quality children’s media content are well
established; however, research has largely concentrated on the quality of educational
television programming (Linebarger, Brey, Fenstermacher, & Barr, 2017). Content analyses
have described in detail the strengths of various instructional methods for character

JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA

539

interactivity, as well as how structural elements like pace and context familiarity affect
a child’s ease in processing the educational material presented. High-quality educational
television programs have been associated with increased “school-readiness, . . . problem
solving . . . and literacy” for viewers (Linebarger et al., 2017, p. 98). Yet children now spend
a greater share of their average media consumption using mobile devices (Rideout, 2017);
when operating as a platform for app use, the structure and interactive features of mobile
devices differ considerably from traditional television programs. However, little research
exists detailing how educational apps compare to educational television programming,
and whether the described positive developmental outcomes exist for educational apps.
Moreover, this evaluation matters because time spent playing lower-quality educational
apps could be displacing more developmentally beneficial activities, such as reading,
physical activity, or unstructured social play (AAP Council on Communications and Media,
2016).
Additionally, the Four Pillars approach allows for evaluation of different aspects of app
design that may have varying implications for child development and gameplay experi­
ence. For example, Pillar 1 (Active Learning) may relate more to open-ended problemsolving, while Pillar 2 (Engagement in the Learning Process) may matter more for child
distractibility; Pillar 4 (Social Interaction) may have implications for social reciprocity.
Importantly, an app does not necessarily need to earn top scores for every Pillar to be
considered a worthwhile educational app. Future research should examine how Four
Pillars scores associate with children’s acquisition of in-app educational content, as well
how each of the Pillars independently correspond with the aforementioned learning
outcomes.

Implications for app designers, app stores, and consumers
These results highlight the need for improved design of educational apps by developers,
as well as modifications to how educational apps are displayed and promoted in app
stores. We encourage app designers to develop apps rooted in the ways children learn
most effectively. Based on evidence from the Science of Learning, the Four Pillars frame­
work aims to provide exactly that type of guidance (Hirsh-Pasek et al., 2015); however,
work remains to translate this evidence in a way that is easily accessible and actionable by
app designers. We recommend that app designers and app stores work with child
development experts to create evidence-based ratings of apps, so that higher-quality
products with fewer distracting enhancements can be found by parents.
These findings also suggest that parents may benefit from understanding how to
evaluate the quality of educational apps before downloading them. The Zero to Three
Screen Sense E-AIMS guidelines, rooted in the Four Pillars, provide instructions for parents
on evaluating whether apps meet the Four Pillars criteria; this may help them avoid
installing lower-quality apps (Zero to Three, 2018). Additionally, parents can be encour­
aged to install apps for their children, rather than letting children download apps on their
own, or require a password before download. They may also seek app reviews from
trusted sources like Common Sense Media when choosing content for their child.
Likewise, parents can judge the quality of apps by co-playing with children, as well as
help them build digital literacy and transfer their knowledge from apps to the threedimensional world more readily (Barr, 2013). Lastly, these results highlight that most apps

540

M. MEYER ET AL.

cannot recreate more traditional forms of child-led, hands-on, unstructured play and their
benefits, which should still be encouraged (Yogman, Garner, Hutchinson, Hirsh-Pasek, &
Golinkoff, 2018).

Study limitations
Given the ever-changing nature of media, our study only describes a sample of educa­
tional apps from a specific point in time. Apps are frequently updated by developers; thus,
the design of activities, curriculum, and gamified mechanisms presented in apps during
the time-frame in which we coded them may be different if accessed at another time.
Moreover, our coding scheme used a scale developed based on the range of observed
design features in this sample; our cut-offs for different scores could not be informed by
evidence about child learning, or compared to other educational experiences. Thus, our
scores should not be interpreted as absolute measures of the educational quality of
sampled apps. However, we were able to assess to what extent popular commercially
available apps aligned with Four Pillars principles. This coding scheme represents
a preliminary step in the process of developing reliable and valid measures for evaluating
children’s educational apps.
Additionally, our coding scheme did not account for the age of an app’s target
audience. Future investigators should consider incorporating this criterion in subsequent
appraisal tools, as possible applications of the Four Pillars likely differ based on a user’s
age. For example, the structure and design features necessary to promote active learning
(Pillar 1) for preschool-age children may be insufficient to promote active learning for
school-age students.

Conclusion
Our study results highlight a need for improvement to the quality and design of inter­
active features in educational apps marketed to young children. Overall, 58% of apps
studied showed lower-quality design when assessed against the Four Pillars of Learning
principles. Although smartphones and tablets have been widely available only in the last
decade, it is important for the industry to join with cognitive and developmental experts
on children’s learning to produce apps that are more consonant with how children learn.
Until then, it is important for parents to know that not all apps are equally “educational.”

Funding
This work was supported by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
[NICHD / R21HD094051].

Notes on contributors
Marisa Meyer, B.A. is a postbaccalaureate research fellow at the National Institute of Mental Health
(NIMH). She studied psychology at the University of Michigan, graduating head of her class with
Highest Distinction. Marisa conceptualized and conducted an honors thesis, receiving the W.B.

JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA

541

Pillsbury Prize for outstanding research in the field of psychology. Marisa is currently refining her
research and clinical skills through the NIMH Intramural Research Training Award.
Jennifer M. Zosh, Ph.D., is an Associate Professor of Human Development and Family Studies at
Penn State University’s Brandywine campus. As the Director of the Brandywine Child Development
Lab, she studies early cognitive development. Most recently, her work has focused on the topic of
playful learning in digital and real-world contexts. She received her Ph.D. in Psychological and Brain
Sciences from The Johns Hopkins University.
Caroline McLaren is an undergraduate at the University of Michigan, studying Movement Science
and Intraoperative Neuromonitoring. Since 2018, she has been a research assistant in the Radesky
Lab through the University of Michigan Medical School.
Michael Robb is senior director of research at Common Sense. He has been involved in issues
involving children and media for over 20 years, and has published research on the impact of digital
media on young children’s language development, early literacy outcomes, and problem-solving
abilities in a variety of academic journals. Michael received his B.A. from Tufts University and M.
A. and Ph.D. in psychology from UC Riverside.
Harlan McCaffery earned his MS in Biostatistics from Northwestern University in 2018, and has
worked at the University of Michigan Department of Pediatrics since 2018. He has expertise in
statistical programming, data visualization, and advanced statistical methods including mixed
effects modeling, latent growth curve modeling, and survival analysis. He has collaborated on
research related to infant growth and development, feeding and eating behaviors, and predictors
of hospital length of stay.
Roberta Michnick Golinkoff, Ph.D., Cornell University, is known for her research on language
development, the benefits of play, children’s spatial learning, and the effects of media on children,
with her research funded by Federal agencies and the LEGO Foundation. Playful Learning
Landscapes, her latest project, marries architectural design and the science of learning to invite
informal learning. Her last book, Becoming Brilliant reached the New York Times best-seller list.
Kathy Hirsh-Pasek, Professor of Psychology at Temple University and senior fellow at the Brookings
Institution has written 16 books and 250+ publications. She served as President of the International
Congress for Infant Studies and is on the Governing Board of the Society for Research in Child
Development. Winning awards from every psychological and educational society for basic and
translational research, she is passionate about putting learning science in the hands of parents and
educators.
Jenny Radesky, M.D., Assistant Professor of Pediatrics at the University of Michigan Medical School,
is a practicing developmental-behavioral pediatrician and media researcher. Her research examines
design affordances of modern technology in the context of parent–child interaction and child
social-emotional development. She authored the American Academy of Pediatrics policy state­
ments on early childhood media use (2016) and digital advertising to children (2020).

ORCID
Marisa Meyer
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6837-7192
Jennifer M. Zosh
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1698-4708
Kathy Hirsh-Pasek
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2947-4544

References
AAP Council on Communications and Media. (2016). Media and young minds. Pediatrics, 138(5),
e20162591. Article doi: 10.1542/peds.2016-2591.

542

M. MEYER ET AL.

Barr, R. (2013). Memory constraints on infant learning from picture books, television, and
touchscreens. Child Development Perspectives, 7(4), 205–210. doi:10.1111/cdep.12041
Barr, R., Shuck, L., Salerno, K., Atkinson, E., & Linebarger, D. L. (2010). Music interferes with learning
from television during infancy. Infant and Child Development, 19(3), 313–331. doi:10.1002/icd.666
Binns, R., Lyngs, U., Van Kleek, M., Zhao, J., Libert, T., & Shadbolt, N. (Eds.) (2018). Third party tracking
in the mobile ecosystem. Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on Web Science. Amsterdam,
Netherlands: ACM Digital Library. 10.1145/3201064.3201089
Bond, B. J., & Calvert, S. L. (2014). A model and measure of US parents’ perceptions of young
children’s parasocial relationships. Journal of Children and Media, 8(3), 286–304. doi:10.1080/
17482798.2014.890948
Callaghan, M. N., & Reich, S. M. (2018). Are educational preschool apps designed to teach? An
analysis of the app market. Learning, Media and Technology, 43(3), 280–293. doi:10.1080/
17439884.2018.1498355
Chiong, C., & Shuler, C. (2010). Learning: Is there an app for that? Investigations of young children’s
usage and learning with mobile devices and apps. The Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame
Workshop. http://joanganzcooneycenter.org/publication/learning-is-there-an-app-for-that/
Christakis, D. A., Garrison, M. M., Herrenkohl, T., Haggerty, K., Rivara, F. P., Zhou, C., & Liekweg, K.
(2013). Modifying media content for preschool children: A randomized controlled trial. Pediatrics,
131(3), 431–438. doi:10.1542/peds.2012-1493
Committee on Developments in the Science of Learning. (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind,
experience, and school: Expanded edition. Washington, DC: The National Academie Press.
10.17226/9853
Falloon, G. (2013). Young students using iPads: App design and content influences on their learning
pathways. Computers & Education, 68, 505–521. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2013.06.006
Fisher, A. V., Godwin, K. E., & Seltman, H. (2014). Visual environment, attention allocation, and
learning in young children: When too much of a good thing may be bad. Psychological Science,
25(7), 1362–1370. doi:10.1177/0956797614533801
Hiniker, A., Lee, B., Kientz, J. A., & Radesky, J. S. (Eds.). (2018). Let’s play! digital and analog play
between preschools and parents. Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. Montreal, Canada: ACM Digital Library. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.
3174233
Hirsh-Pasek, K., Zosh, J. M., Golinkoff, R. M., Gray, J. H., Robb, M. B., & Kaufman, J. (2015). Putting
education in “educational” apps: Lessons from the science of learning. Psychological Science in the
Public Interest, 16(1), 3–34. doi:10.1177/1529100615569721
Huber, B., Tarasuik, J., Antoniou, M. N., Garrett, C., Bowe, S. J., Kaufman, J., & Team, S. B. (2016). Young
children’s transfer of learning from a touchscreen device. Computers in Human Behavior, 56,
56–64. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2015.11.010
Kannass, K. N., & Colombo, J. (2007). The effects of continuous and intermittent distractors on
cognitive performance and attention in preschoolers. Journal of Cognition and Development, 8(1),
63–77. doi:10.1080/15248370709336993
Linebarger, D., Barr, R., Lapierre, M., & Piotrowski, J. (2014). Associations between parenting, media
use, cumulative risk, and children’s executive functioning. Journal of Developmental and
Behavioral Pediatrics, 35(6), 367–377. doi:10.1097/DBP.0000000000000069
Linebarger, D. N., Brey, E., Fenstermacher, S., & Barr, R. (2017). What makes preschool educational
television educational? A content analysis of literacy, language-promoting, and prosocial pre­
school programming. In R. Barr & D. Linebarger (Eds.), Media exposure during infancy and early
childhood (pp. 97–133). New York, NY USA: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-45102-2_7
Mayer, R. E. (2014). Research-based principles for designing multimedia instruction. In V. A. Benassi,
C. E. Overson, & C. M. Hakala (Eds.), Applying science of learning in education: Infusing psychological
science into the curriculum pp.(59–70). Washington, DC: Retrieved from the Society for the
Teaching of Psychology website http://teachpsych.org/ebooks/asle2014/index.php
Meyer, M., Adkins, V., Yuan, N., Weeks, H. M., Chang, Y. J., & Radesky, J. (2019). Advertising in young
children’s apps: A content analysis. Journal of Developmental andBehavioral Pediatrics, 40(1),
32–39. doi:10.1097/DBP.0000000000000622

JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA

543

Munzer, T. G., Miller, A. L., Weeks, H. M., Kaciroti, N., & Radesky, J. S. (2019). Differences in
parent-toddler interactions with electronic versus print books. Pediatrics, 143(4), Article,
e20182012. 10.1542/peds.2018-2012.
Outhwaite, L. A., Faulder, M., Gulliford, A., & Pitchford, N. J. (2019). Raising early achievement in math
with interactive apps: A randomized control trial. Journal of Educational Psychology, 111(2),
284–298. https://doi-org/10.1037/edu0000286
Radesky, J. S., Eisenberg, S., Kistin, C. J., Gross, J., Block, G., Zuckerman, B., & Silverstein, M. (2016).
Overstimulated consumers or next-generation learners? Parent tensions about child mobile
technology use. Annals of Family Medicine, 14(6), 503–508. doi:10.1370/afm.1976
Radesky, J. S., Weeks, H. M., Ball, R., Schaller, A., Yeo, S., Durnez, J., . . . Barr, R. (2020). Young
children’s use of smartphones and tablets. Pediatrics, 146(1), Article, e20193518. 10.1542/
peds.2019-3518.
Rideout, V. (2017). The common sense census: Media use by kids age zero to eight. common sense
media. https://www.commonsensemedia.org/research/the-common-sense-census-media-useby-kids-age-zero-to-eight–2017
Tare, M., Chiong, C., Ganea, P., & Deloache, J. (2010). Less is more: How manipulative features affect
children’s learning from picture books. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 31(5),
395–400. doi:10.1016/j.appdev.2010.06.005
Vaala, S., Ly, A., & Levine, M. H. (2015). Getting a read on the app stores: A market scan and analysis of
children’s literacy apps. The Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop. Retrieved from
http://joanganzcooneycenter.org/publication/getting-a-read-on-the-app-stores-a-market-scanand-analysis-of-childrens-literacy-apps/
Vosniadou, S. (2001). How children learn. International Academy of Education. http://www.ibe.
unesco.org/
Yogman, M., Garner, A., Hutchinson, J., Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Golinkoff, R. M. (2018). The power of play:
A pediatric role in enhancing development in young children. Pediatrics, 142(3), Article,
e20182058. 10.1542/peds.2018-2058.
Zero to Three. (2018, October 25). Choosing media content for young children using the E-AIMS model.
https://www.zerotothree.org/resources/2533-choosing-media-content-for-young-children-using
-the-e-aims-model#downloads

544

M. MEYER ET AL.

Appendices
Appendix A. pillar 1 – Active Learning.
Score
Description
0
Pillar objectives not met. App includes:
● Activities that can be completed with little mental effort; and/or
● Activities that elicit simple “stimulus-response reactions to on-screen actions;”1 and/or
● Passively following instructions with extremely constrained design that involves tapping the screen to make
pages advance.
1
Activities have some learning objective, but are structurally closed-loop or repetitive.
● There are many hints, demonstrations, or prompts to tell the child what to do; and/or
● App drills skills, and feels like an online workbook; and/or
● App forces activities to automatically advance from one activity to the next.
2
Activities have a learning objective, with some degree of flexibility or child-led problem-solving to complete
them.
● There is a mild degree of mental challenge to the app activities, such as having the player actively follow the
programmed instructions or narrations to complete the learning objective.
● Choices for completing the task may be constrained.
3
Pillar objectives met. App is a “minds-on” game, and includes activities “that require thinking and intellectual
manipulation.”1
● Activities allow the player to generate responses and incrementally provide more challenge.
● There may be several steps for the child to follow; however, the steps aren’t spoon-fed to them, and hints
are subtle or appropriate.

Appendix A. pillar 2 – Engagement in the Learning Process instructions: treating each of the three
category requirements as “ANDs,” start assessing the app as if it earns a 3, and then move down the
categories until all three “ANDs” are met.
Score
Distracting Advertising
● Embedding ad videos in gameplay;
0
and/or
● If pop-up ad interrupts midgameplay (e.g., in the middle of
making a dessert, but not after
completing one puzzle – must
interrupt gameplay) more than one
time; and/or
● 4+ disruptive advertising present.
● 1-3 kinds of disruptive advertising
1
present (includes pop-up ads, ban­
ner ads, hidden ads, rating
prompts, social media prompts,
and in-app purchases).
● Only in-app purchases allowed to
2
be present.
● No disruptive advertising should be
present.
● If character promotes in-app pur­
chases, give a 0 code for emo­
tional manipulation.
3

● No advertising present.

Distracting Feedback

Gamification

● Object feedback provided after ● No active learning. Design
each action (e.g., earning a coin
and seeing it put in the piggy
bank and hearing a “cha-ching”
noise after each step in an activ­
ity – like after spraying water on
a shirt to be ironed).

features are purely for
entertainment purposes.

● Feedback at the end of the game ● Extraneous

visual and
and/or after each action.
sound effects, which may
● 6+ visual or auditory feedback
distract the user from the
mechanisms, and 1+ object
game.
● (No code 2).
reward.
● Feedback at the end of the game
only.
● 4–5 types of feedback provided,
of which only 1 should be an
object reward.
● If more than one object reward
(potential to earn coins and
a sticker), give a 1 code.
● Feedback at the end of the game ● Visual and sound effects
only.
included only to enhance
● Very minimal – 3 or less types of
learning and engagement
feedback, of which only 1 should
in the game.
be an object reward.

JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA

545

Appendix A. pillar 3 – Meaningful Learning.
Score
Description
0
Pillar objectives not met. App’s activities have no relevance to child’s life experiences, and no learning
objectives.
1
App activities involve rote learning. The learning objectives are relevant to the child’s life, but the design of the
activities and the presentation of the learning objectives do not promote meaningful learning.
2
App activities go beyond rote learning and repetition, and provide opportunities for meaningful learning in
a digital setting; however, the app doesn’t explicitly prompt the child to engage in similar activities outside
of their device, or these prompts are subtle and wouldn’t be easy to follow if the user can’t read.
● App activities may attempt to link prior knowledge to new content.
● App activities may model new ways of thinking or acting.
● For apps that promote development of rote skills (such as Starfall ABC or Endless Alphabet), they must
provide multiple examples of a concept. Activities and explanations must go beyond a simplistic pre­
sentation of “this is X,” and instead discuss or demonstrate how the concept is contextually meaningful.
● Ask yourself: “does the app ask the child to go beyond rote learning?”
3
Pillar objectives met.
● App’s activities based on meaningful learning experiences that would be easy for the child to then do in real
life.
● High-quality connections between gameplay and the child’s life.
● Gameplay narrative and principal learning objective strongly intertwined.

Appendix A. Pillar 4 – Social Interaction.
Score
Description
0
Pillar objectives not met.
● App structure does not provide opportunities for in-person interactions or mediated interactions, and
● App structure does not provide opportunities for development of parasocial relationships with characters in
the app.
● App may have features to involve parents or another player, but also has lots of gamification that would
1
grab child’s attention and make it hard to get responsive interactions with the child; and/or
● Potential for development of weak parasocial relationship with app characters.
● There is a clear space for a parent or sibling to play along (without a prompt to do activities with that person
2
in the real world), such as through prompts for the user to engage in turn-taking or multi-touch input onscreen that invites others to play; and/or
● App provides opportunity for development of high-quality parasocial relationships with app characters.
3
Pillar objectives met.
● App structure provides opportunities for social interaction, including “face-to-face interactions around the
screen,”1 such as the parent playing together with the child; and
● Ideas are presented for how to transfer knowledge to the real world with a parent or sibling.

546

M. MEYER ET AL.

Appendix B. Sampled apps and associated pillar scores.

App Name
Duolingo: Learn Languages
Free
Children’s Doctor Dentist
ABC Kids – Tracing & Phonics
ABC Preschool Free
LEGO DUPLO Town
Baby Puzzles
Baby Panda’s Potty Training –
Toilet Time
Little Panda Travel Safety
Bible App for Kids: Read the
Nativity Story
Colors for Kids, Toddlers,
Babies – Learning Game
Sweet Baby Girl Daycare
Animals Puzzle for Kids
Sweet Baby Girl – Dream House
and Play Time
Rosetta Stone: Learn to Speak &
Read New Languages
Draw.ly – Color by Number
Pixel Art Coloring
Dentist games for kids
Baby Panda Home Safety
McPlay
Baby Phone – Games for
Babies, Parents and Family
Kids Educational Game 5
Little Panda Earthquake Safety
Super ABC! Learning games for
kids! Preschool apps
Kids Learn Professions
Educational Games 4 Kids
Unir Puntos – Animales
Farming Simulator 18
Toca Lab: Elements
Teach Your Monster to Read –
Phonics and Reading
Stellarium Mobile Sky Map
Drawing for Kids and Toddlers
Learn to Read with Tommy
Turtle
Star Walk – Night Sky Guide:
Planets and Stars Map
XtraMath
Stack the States
Vocabulary.com
Sight Words Games & Flash
card
Kids Learn About Animals
Solar Walk 2 – Spacecraft 3D
and Space Exploration
Learn Letter Sounds with
Carnival Kids
Learn Letter Names and Sounds
with ABC Trains
Kids ABC Tracing and Alphabet
Writing
Daniel Tiger’s Stop & Go Potty
Second Grade Learning Games

Pillar 1
(Active
Learning)
Score
1

Pillar 2
(Engagement in
Learning Process)
Score
0

Pillar 3
(Meaningful
Learning) Score
2

Pillar 4
(Social
Interaction)
Score
0

App
Total
Score
3

1
1
2
3
1
1

1
1
1
3
1
1

1
1
1
2
1
2

1
1
0
1
0
1

4
4
4
9
3
5

1
2

0
3

3
1

1
1

5
7

1

1

1

0

3

1
1
1

0
1
0

1
1
1

1
0
1

3
3
3

1

1

2

0

4

2

0

2

0

4

1
1
2
0

1
0
1
0

1
3
1
0

1
1
2
0

4
5
6
0

1
1
1

1
0
1

1
3
1

2
2
0

5
6
3

1
1
1
3
2
1

1
1
1
0
3
1

1
1
1
2
2
1

0
2
0
2
1
1

3
5
3
7
8
4

2
2
1

3
0
1

2
2
1

0
0
1

7
4
4

2

3

2

0

7

1
1
1
1

1
1
1
1

1
1
2
1

2
0
0
1

5
3
4
4

1
2

1
2

1
2

0
0

3
6

1

1

1

0

3

1

1

1

0

3

1

1

1

0

3

2
1

3
1

3
1

2
0

10
3

(Continued)

JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA

547

Appendix B. (Continued).

App Name
Zoombinis
Stack the Countries
PAW Patrol Rescue Run
Peekaboo Barn
Sago Mini Pet Cafe
BRIO World – Railway
Monkey Preschool Fix-It
Math Learner: Easy
Mathematics
HOMER Reading: Learn to Read
Kiddopia – ABC Toddler Games
Hidden Pictures Puzzles
Epic!
NOGGIN Preschool
SkyView Lite
PBS KIDS Video
Quizizz: Play to Learn
busuu – Language Learning
My Very Hungry Caterpillar AR
Nick Jr.
PBS KIDS Games
Speech Blubs: Language
Therapy
Main Street Pets Big Vacation
Dr. Panda Train
Toca Life: World
TinyTap – Educational Games
Grades K-5 Math Learning
Games
Drawing for kids: doodle games
Learn Languages with Memrise
Endless Learning Academy
Fiete Sports Games for Kids
Busy Shapes & Colors
Baby Piano for Kids & Toddlers
Toca Hair Salon 3
Toca Kitchen 2
Toca Life: Neighborhood
Toca Life: School
Toca Life: Hospital
Elmo Loves ABCs
Endless Alphabet
Monkey Preschool Lunchbox
My Town: Airport
Preschool All In One Basic Skills
Counting & Numbers.
Learnin . . .
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles:
Half-Shell Heroes
Phonics Genius
Metamorphabet
Melody Jams
Tongo Music – for kids
My Food – Nutrition for Kids
Montessori Numberland
Curious George Train
Adventures
Grandma’s Preschool
Eric Carle’s Brown Bear Animal
Parade

Pillar 1
(Active
Learning)
Score

Pillar 2
(Engagement in
Learning Process)
Score

Pillar 3
(Meaningful
Learning) Score

Pillar 4
(Social
Interaction)
Score

App
Total
Score

3
1
0
0
1
3
1
1

3
1
1
3
3
2
1
1

2
1
1
1
1
2
1
1

1
0
2
0
1
1
1
1

9
3
4
4
6
8
4
4

1
1
1
1
0
3
0
1
1
2
0
1
1

1
1
1
1
3
1
1
1
1
3
1
1
1

2
1
2
1
3
3
3
1
2
2
0
1
2

1
1
1
2
2
0
2
1
0
1
2
2
1

5
4
5
5
8
7
6
4
4
8
3
5
5

2
1
3
1
1

0
1
2
1
0

2
1
2
1
1

1
1
1
0
1

5
4
8
3
3

2
1
1
1
1
0
2
2
3
3
3
1
1
1
2
1
1

1
1
2
1
2
1
3
3
3
3
3
1
1
1
1
1
1

1
1
2
1
1
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
1
1

0
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
0
1

4
3
6
4
4
2
8
8
9
9
9
6
5
4
6
3
4

0

0

0

1

1

1
1
2
0
2
1
1

3
3
3
3
3
1
1

1
2
2
1
3
1
1

0
0
1
1
2
1
1

5
6
8
5
10
4
4

1
1

1
3

1
1

1
1

4
6

(Continued)

548

M. MEYER ET AL.

Appendix B. (Continued).

App Name
Sago Mini Puppy Preschool
Super Why! Phonics Fair
Montessorium: Intro to Letters
The Orchard by HABA
LEGO DUPLO Train
LEGO Juniors Create & Cruise
Colors & Shapes – Kids Learn
Color and Shape
Balloon Pop Kids Learning
Game Free for babies
ABC Alphabet games for
toddlers! Learning letters!
Spanish Lucas’ Whiteboard
Monster Trucks Game for Kids 2
123 Numbers – Count & Tracing
Sago Mini Holiday Trucks and
Diggers
Sago Mini Friends
Baby Panda’s Fashion Dress Up
Game
ABC Animals
Baby games: puzzles for kids
Toddler Learning Game –
EduKitty
KidsDoodle
123 Toddler games for 2+ years
Learning Games 4 Kids Toddlers
Match games for kids toddlers
PaintSparkle
Preschool All-In-One
Sorter Deluxe
Toddler Games: puzzles, shapes
Tozzle Lite – Toddler’s favorite
The Wheels on the Bus Musical

Pillar 1
(Active
Learning)
Score

Pillar 2
(Engagement in
Learning Process)
Score

Pillar 3
(Meaningful
Learning) Score

Pillar 4
(Social
Interaction)
Score

App
Total
Score

1
1
1
1
1
1
1

1
1
1
1
3
1
1

1
1
1
1
1
1
1

1
2
0
1
1
1
1

4
5
3
4
6
4
4

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

2

0

3

2
1
1
2

1
0
1
3

1
1
1
2

0
1
1
1

4
3
4
8

2
2

3
1

2
1

1
1

8
5

1
1
1

1
1
1

1
1
1

1
0
1

4
3
4

2
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

2
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1

0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0

5
3
4
3
5
4
3
3
3
3

